Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Procedia CIRP
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/procir

Benchmarking framework for robotic arc welding motion planning
Jeroen De Maeyer a,∗, Eric Demeester a
KU Leuven, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Diepenbeek Campus, ACRO Research Group, Belgium

article info
Article history: Received 30 September 2019 Revised 24 April 2020 Accepted 25 May 2020
Keywords: Motion planning Robot arc welding Software benchmark

a b s t r a c t
Producing a small series of large complex parts using robotic arc welding is challenging due to the time it takes to program the robot. Currently, oﬄine programming software assists the operator in programming hundreds of welds. This is often still an iterative process because the welding robot or torch may be in collision during part of the weld motion. Adding motion planning software in this workﬂow could reduce the time required to generate a robot program. However, the capabilities of motion planning algorithms in this context are not clear. We present a generic framework to evaluate and compare motion planning algorithms for robot arc welding. This framework allows integration of existing open source and commercial planners on different levels of abstraction depending on their capabilities. Different planners can be combined and benchmarked as a group if a single planner is not suﬃcient to solve all aspects of the problem. The framework is applied to two realistic welding cases to show its potential.
© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )

1. Introduction
Robot welding is an important application domain for industrial robots. According to McKinsey (Teulieres et al., 2019), 82,000 of the 381,000 shipped in 2017 meant for welding and soldering. In a typical application, the robot must weld tens to hundreds of seams while avoiding collision with itself, ﬁxtures, the workpiece, and other obstacles within the environment. Other applications such as painting pose similar constraints and challenges. These robot programs are often generated using oﬄine programming (OLP) software. For complex workpieces, manually ﬁnding collision-free paths can be very time-consuming. Software packages such as Siemens, Verbotics, (Larkin et al., 2016), and Delfoi ARC Delfoi offer automatic path planning capabilities. However, it is not clear in general how successful these algorithms are in ﬁnding collision-free paths for diﬃcult workpieces. In addition, there is a large offer of open-source motion planning algorithms and libraries (Edwards, 2015; Schulman et al., 2014; S¸ ucan et al., 2012), but their capabilities are not yet clear in the context of robot welding. This paper presents a framework with which we want to answer these questions in the future. A planner’s objective is to ﬁnd as a valid path in conﬁguration space (C-space) for the complete welding task. This includes point-to-point planning in C-space,
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: jeroen.demaeyer@kuleuven.be (J. De Maeyer).

without end-effector constraints to move towards the workpiece, and semi-constrained end-effector motion during the welding process. The latter will be called task space (T -space) constraints. In the remainder of this text the corresponding problem will be referred to as path following. We do not consider robot dynamics or time-optimal motion planning, as the kinematic end-effector constraints are the priority during the welding process. For the inbetween paths, the selected ﬁle format for robot models supports adding dynamic parameters such as mass and inertia. This enables integration of planners in our benchmarking framework that optimize objectives that include dynamics. This extension is left as an avenue for future work.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. First, related research is discussed in Section 2 followed by a short introduction to the Robot Operating System in Section 3. Then, the framework itself is presented in Section 4. Two shorter sections discuss the performance criteria (4.5) and the implementation (5), followed by a validation of the framework in Section 6 and a conclusion in Section 7.
2. Related work
While some ﬁelds related to industrial automation such as computer vision have well-established benchmarks and datasets (for example the MNIST database of handwritten digits), the situation in motion planning for robot manipulators is different. The devel-

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2020.05.233 2212-8271/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ )
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

J. De Maeyer and E. Demeester
opment of benchmarks is less mature (Iossiﬁdis et al., 2005). However, a large amount of research exists and the ﬁeld progresses fast. This section organizes benchmarks for robot manipulators in three groups. The ﬁrst group considers generic frameworks to benchmark existing algorithms. The second group contains benchmark results that are part of a research paper that introduces a new planning algorithm. The third group contains benchmark results generated with existing frameworks and existing planners, applied to a speciﬁc problem.
2.1. Benchmarking frameworks
The most recent framework is presented in Moll et al. (2015) and Cohen et al. (2012). Their framework allows you to benchmark point-to-point (probabilistic) motion planners. In addition, they support goal and path constraints. The implementation is part of the currently maintained version of Sucan and Chitta. The main difference is their focus on single segment small planning tasks completely solved by a single planner. According to the authors’ knowledge, there is no single planner that can solve a complete welding task and that integrates with this framework. TrajOpt (Schulman et al., 2014)) comes close, but does not support application-speciﬁc end-effector constraints for robot arc welding. Therefore, we aim to compare portfolios of planners. Such a portfolio consist of different types of low-level motion planners in combination with a high-level planner that used the low-level to solve the complete welding task. This includes path following and point-to-point motions in-between the different weld segments. Another inspiration for this work was the Task and Motion planning benchmark presented in Lagriffoul et al. (2018). However, we do not consider a welding task as a task and motion planning problem and consider the weld sequence to be ﬁxed. However, the ideas from task and motion planning research such as (Görner et al., 2019) and (Dantam et al., 2018) could highly improve the basic high-level planner used in the initial version of this framework. But the work presented here focuses on how to integrate different existing planners, not on one speciﬁc planner.
2.2. Planner speciﬁc benchmarks
When Schulman and his colleges published their new motion planning algorithms TrajOpt in Schulman et al. (2014), it included extensive benchmark results for different planning problems. The arm planning problems consisted of 198 variations of moving the PR2 arm with 7 degrees of freedom in a cluttered workspace. TrajOpt was compared with the RRTConnect and LBKPIECE planners from the open motion planning library (OMPL) (S¸ ucan et al., 2012) and with CHOMP (Zucker et al., 2013). It provides insight into the state of the art motion planning showing success rates from 0.65 to 0.96 and planning times from 0.19 s to 4.91 s on a single personal computer. As with the framework in the previous section, this benchmark focused on a single point-to-point motion planning problem with constraints.
2.3. Application speciﬁc benchmarks
In Iversen and Ellekilde (2017), Iversen and Ellekilde investigate the performance of existing motion planning algorithms for a complete bin-picking process cycle. They include RRTConnect, RRT∗, FMT∗, PRM, and TrajOpt. They mostly report success rates of 100 %, with RRT∗ dropping to 83 % for a scene with obstacles around the picking setup. They conclude that slower algorithms generating shorter paths often result in a shorter overall cycle time (planning time + execution time). Another comparison of the OMPL al-

Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252
gorithms is presented in Pirozzi et al. (2018). In their robot arm planning case, the BKPIECE (with default conﬁguration) gets the highest success rate of 68%. However, all OMPL planners are outperformed by CHOMP with a success rate of 96% for 5 different planning scenarios. These results, again, provide some insight into what we can expect from the current generation of planning algorithms when solving arc welding problems.
To conclude this section, the main contributions of this paper are given below.
• Describe a framework to benchmark different combinations of several low-level planners and a high-level planner.
• Provide a simpliﬁed interface to specify tasks, closely related to the current practice in industrial robot programming.
• Deﬁne a standard interface to integrate any low-level planner in the framework. This allows for integration on different abstraction levels. In addition, the interface strictly separates the description of the planning problem from planner speciﬁc settings.
3. The Robot Operating System (ROS)
The modular design and large offer of tools and algorithms makes ROS an ideal basis for benchmarking frameworks. This paper uses ROS-speciﬁc concepts that are introduced here to clarify the following sections. ROS can be described as Open Source Robotics Foundation:
“... a ﬂexible framework for writing robot software. It is a collection of tools, libraries, and conventions that aim to simplify the task of creating complex and robust robot behavior across a wide variety of robotic platforms.”
The benchmarking framework, and any ROS application in general, consists of nodes, independent programs that can communicate through messages that follow a ROS-speciﬁc protocol. This communication can be organized in different ways. Our benchmarking framework uses services. A node (for example a path planner) exposes a service on the ROS network. Other nodes can send a service request message to this node and will receive a service response message when the service is ﬁnished. Appendix A shows examples of services.
In addition a running ROS application has a parameter server. This is a dictionary where nodes can access conﬁguration parameters at runtime. In our benchmarking framework, and in many other ROS applications, planner-speciﬁc conﬁguration values are loaded to the parameter server where planning nodes can access them before executing a planning request. The next section discusses the design of the benchmarking framework using these ROS tools and concepts.
4. The benchmarking framework
The general philosophy is that planning algorithms, called planners in the remainder of the text, can interface with the framework at different levels. On the highest level, a planner can parse the task description and planning environment and generate a solution. Planners that are not able to solve the complete task can be combined with other planners. The low-level interface described in Section 4.1 allows this combination of planners to solve a single problem. This is useful because existing planners often specialize in solving a speciﬁc type of motion planning problem. Now that we have different low-level planners, it follows that a high-level planner is necessary to combine the low-level planners and solve the planning task (4.2). The high level planner connects the differ-

248
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

J. De Maeyer and E. Demeester

Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252

Fig. 2. Illustration of the task of the high-level planner. Different commands from the task speciﬁcation language are executed using multiple calls to low-level planners through there service interface.

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the framework. The main contributions of this research are the task speciﬁcation language, low-level generic planning interface, and general setup design.
ent segments, calling the low-level planner to get the joint positions for every segment in the path. The task itself is deﬁned using an easy to use speciﬁcation language inspired by industrial robot programming languages (Section 4.3). The robot and planning environment are represented using the Universal Robot Description Format (URDF) which is widely supported by motion planners. All planner settings, planning results and other data necessary to reproduce a benchmark are logged to a database, as shown in the framework overview in Fig. 1.
4.1. Low-level interface
A low-level planner ﬁnds a sequence of joint positions to follow a speciﬁc weld line, or a speciﬁc transition motion in between two welds. The low-level interface is deﬁned in the format of ROS services. For planners that are not compatible with ROS, the service can be implemented using a different robotics framework. Communication with ROS is possible for these differ-
ent robotics frameworks using the rosbridge_suite package.
This allows communication with ROS through a WebSocket server, which programming language used for motion planning often support. The details of this interface are shown in Appendix A. There are no planning speciﬁc settings included in the low-level planning requests. The format leaves the planner complete freedom in how to solve the problem. Any planner speciﬁc setting is read from a conﬁguration ﬁle and added to the database when running the benchmark.
4.2. High-level planning
A high-level planner parses the complete welding task and divides it in different path segments. Every weld line and transition motion is a segment. Then the high-level planner decides which type of low-level planner must be used to solve every segment separately and combines the solution into the robot motion for the complete welding task. The simplest version of a high-level planner maps commands from the task speciﬁcation directly to
low-level planning services. For example, a movep command is
mapped to a low-level planner that supports point-to-point planning to a T -space goal. In this case, the high-level planner has no control over the speciﬁc C-space conﬁguration used to reach this end-effector pose. During future development, more complex highlevel planning approaches can be used. Especially the task constructor framework presented in Görner et al. (2019) would inte-

grate nicely with our framework. Fig. 2 illustrates the high-level planner in relation to the other components.
4.3. Task speciﬁcation
The design philosophy behind the task speciﬁcation language is to emulate how industrial robots are programmed. Instead of sending the“program” to the robot, it serves as a description of a task. It is similar to Aertbeliën and De Schutter (2014), but focused on oﬄine path planning. It allows the user to create named references (variables) to robot conﬁgurations, end-effector poses, and constraints. These can then be used in motion commands to specify the task. Fig. 3 gives an example for a single weld.
4.4. Creating and running benchmarks
The steps involved when using the benchmarking framework are the following.
A MoveIt robot conﬁgurations must be created ﬁrst. For many industrial robots, this is already available online. Such a conﬁguration needs a geometric description of the robot in the Universal Robot Description Format (URDF). In addition, the geometry of the robot environment is included.
Second, a description of the task must be created. This includes a geometric description of the workpiece as an URDF ﬁle, and a description of the robot motion constraints using the task speciﬁcation format mentioned in the previous section. This format was designed to make specifying the task easy and intuitive for small tasks and easy to automatically generate from other software for larger tasks.
Third, the path planners that will be used to solve the planning problem must be integrated using the low-level or high-level interface deﬁned in the previous section. This is the most diﬃcult part of the preliminaries. It is intended that this will be done by experienced people for common motion planners and published online for others to reuse. For this paper, two planning libraries in ROS are integrated already. The Open Motion Planning Library (OMPL) and a custom Cartesian planner developed by the authors.
If all required components are available, a planner can be evaluated using the framework. Running a benchmark consists of the following steps:
• Start the default MoveIt robot conﬁgurations and optionally the visualization.
• Start the planning services that will solve the planning problem.
• Load the desired task. This requires the planning setup, task speciﬁcation and work object description as input.
• Run the benchmark. This requires a conﬁguration ﬁle as input that speciﬁes the planners and planner settings to use.
• Verify that the results where logged to the database.

249
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

J. De Maeyer and E. Demeester

Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252

Fig. 3. An example of welding a single straight line. First, the robot is moved to the home position. Then it moves to an approach pose Papproach above the weld before executing the weld from P1 to P2. Finally, it retracts and moves back to the home conﬁguration. Angles are expressed in degrees and internally converted to radians. A full
description of the language is given online De Maeyer.

All data logged to the database are accessible using existing tools to access a MongoDB database. For the validation of the framework we refer to Section 6. Python scripts are used to process the results.

4.5. Performance criteria

In this framework, planning problems are solved by a combination of different low-level and high-level planners. Therefore, comparing very planner-speciﬁc performance criteria such as the number of sampled states in a sampling-based planner is given a low priority, even though the ﬂexible logging infrastructure allows logging any parameter of interest as long as the planner makes it available. In this framework, we focus on general performance criteria to solve problems consisting of many different segments with different path constraints.

• Success rate: expresses whether the planners ﬁnd a solution. For probabilistic planners, this is expressed as a percentage over several runs.
• Planning time: The time it takes the combination of algorithms to ﬁnd a valid solution. The time it takes to solve speciﬁc subproblems may also be of interest.
• Path-length The cumulative path length in C-space is often used for example.

The results presented in Section 6 calculate the path length as the cumulative sum of the difference between two consecutive robot conﬁgurations q along the path. The difference is calculated using the L1-norm.

N−1

path length = ||qi+1 − qi||1

(1)

i

5. Implementation

The framework is implemented in ROS. As mentioned earlier, communication with external libraries is possible through the JSON

Table 1 This table shows the performance of the OMPL planner RRTConnect for solving the in-between motion. The weld path itself is planned using grid-search having a success rate of 100 %. Values shown are averaged over 20 runs for both cases.

Success rate Average planning time Path length

Case 1 Case 2

100 % 80 %

0.21 s 0.92 s

3.79 rad 11.49 rad

API provided by the rosbridge_suite package Mace. All results
and conﬁgurations are saved in a document-oriented database (MongoDB). This provides large ﬂexibility and the JSON-like document structure integrates very well with Python and ROS, while also providing C++ drivers (most of the algorithms mentioned in related work are implemented in C++). The current implementation and detailed information is available online De Maeyer.
6. Results and discussion
To validate the framework, two different robotic arc welding cases where solved shown in Figs. 4 and 5. RRTConnect from the OMPL library was used for point-to-point planning and a custom grid search planner (an extension of De Maeyer et al., 2018) to plan the weld path. Table 1 shows the performance of RRTConnect for the two cases.
7. Conclusion
This paper presents a framework to benchmark motion planning algorithms that ﬁnd collision-free paths for an arc welding robot. Because this problem consists of different types of subproblems, the framework is designed to compare different combinations of motion planners. Often, a single motion planner is not suﬃcient to solve all types of path constraints encountered in a robot arc welding path.

250
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

J. De Maeyer and E. Demeester

Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252
and the low-level planner interface will increase the ﬂexibility and applicability of the framework.
Appendix A. Low-level interface deﬁnition
An interface for low-level path planners is described in Section 4.1. This interface is deﬁned using ROS services. Existing ROS messages can be reused which increases the compatibility of the framework with existing ROS components. Figs. A.6–A.8 show the input and output parameters of these services in the ROS message format.

Fig. 4. Case 1 Simpliﬁed model of a small part of a truck. The original model is reconstructed based on primitive shapes. This makes it easier to tweak the model and tease out speciﬁc planning diﬃculties.

Fig. A.6. Service request format to call free-space motion planning algorithms, to solve point-to-point planning problems. The planning has to ﬁnd a valid sequence of joint values from an initial C-space conﬁguration to either a goal in C-space or T space. Not all planners have to support the T -space goal. An existing ROS trajectory message is reused.

Fig. 5. Case 2 The case has a weld line that is diﬃcult to reach. This makes it diﬃcult for the point-to-point planner to succeed, as shown by the results in Section 6.

A new task speciﬁcation language, similar to industrial robot languages, is presented. In addition, a generic interface for lowlevel planners is introduced. This allows the integration of a large variety of planning algorithms that work on different levels of abstraction. The framework is applied to two planning problems to show its potential. Future work will add a better high-level planner to enable solving a large variety of arc welding tasks. The current implementation of the framework is mainly limited by the planners that are integrated. A current limitation of the framework itself is the missing speciﬁcation of the objective function. This was not a priority at ﬁrst because in many problems the objective is the same. Adding this functionality to the task speciﬁcation language

Fig. A.7. Service request format for a T -space path following task. Constraints can be used to specify for example the allowed rotation around the torch axis. A constraint is assumed to be valid along the whole path of this low-level task.

251
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

J. De Maeyer and E. Demeester
Fig. A.8. Service request to sample valid C-space conﬁgurations for a given T -space pose. This involves solving the inverse kinematics problem and sampling of redundant joints values. This service is complementary to the point-to-point service for planners that do not support T -space goals.
CRediT authorship contribution statement Jeroen De Maeyer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Validation, Resources, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Eric Demeester: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. References
Aertbeliën, E., De Schutter, J., 2014. Etasl/etc: a constraint-based task speciﬁcation language and robot controller using expression graphs. In: 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1540–1546.
Cohen, B., Sucan, I.A., Chitta, S., 2012. A generic infrastructure for benchmarking motion planners. In: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 589–595.
Dantam, N.T., Kingston, Z.K., Chaudhuri, S., Kavraki, L.E., 2018. An incremental constraint-based framework for task and motion planning. Int. J. Robot. Res. 37 (10), 1134–1151 .

Procedia CIRP 97 (2021) 247–252
De Maeyer, J.. Acro robotics framework. De Maeyer, J.. Robot task speciﬁcation. De Maeyer, J., Versteyhe, M., Demeester, E., 2018. Sampling-based tube following for
redundant, planar robotic manipulators. In: 2018 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), 1, pp. 752–758. Delfoi,. Delfoi arc. Online. Edwards, S., 2015. The descartes planning library for semi-constrained cartesian trajectories. ROSCon 2015. Last accessed april 2017. Görner, M., Haschke, R., Ritter, H., Zhang, J., 2019. Moveit! task constructor for task-level motion planning. In: 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 190–196. Iossiﬁdis, I., Lawitzky, G., Knoop, S., Zöllner, R., Lawitzky, G., Stopp, A., Grunwald, G., Hägele, M., Dillmann, R., Iossiﬁdis, I., 2005. Towards Benchmarking of Domestic Robotic Assistants. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 403–414. Iversen, T.F., Ellekilde, L.P., 2017. Benchmarking motion planning algorithms for bin-picking applications. Ind. Robot 44 (2), 189–197. Lagriffoul, F., Dantam, N.T., Garrett, C., Akbari, A., Srivastava, S., Kavraki, L.E., 2018. Platform-independent benchmarks for task and motion planning. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 3 (4), 3765–3772. Larkin, N., Short, A., Pan, Z., van Duin, S., 2016. Automatic program generation for welding robots from cad. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), pp. 560–565. Mace, J.,. Rosbridge. Moll, M., S¸ ucan, I.A., Kavraki, L.E., 2015. Benchmarking motion planning algorithms: an extensible infrastructure for analysis and visualization. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 22 (3), 96–102. Open Source Robotics Foundation,. Robot operating system. Pirozzi, S., De Maria, G., Costanzo, M., Natale, C., Lettera, G., 2018. Motion planning and reactive control algorithms for object manipulation in uncertain conditions. Robotics 7 (4), 76. Schulman, J., Duan, Y., Ho, J., Lee, A., Awwal, I., Bradlow, H., Pan, J., Patil, S., Goldberg, K., Abbeel, P., 2014. Motion planning with sequential convex optimization and convex collision checking. Int. J. Robot. Res. 9–13. Siemens,. Kineo. Online. Sucan, I. A., Chitta, S.,. Moveit. Online. S¸ ucan, I.A., Moll, M., Kavraki, L.E., 2012. The Open Motion Planning Library. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 19 (4), 72–82. http://ompl.kavrakilab.org Teulieres, M., Tilley, J., Bolz, L., Leuwing-Dehm, P., Wagner, S., 2019. Industrial Robotics - Insights Into the Sector’s Growth Dynamics. Mckinsey & Company, pp. 1–33. Verbotics, Verbotics weld. Online. Zucker, M., Ratliff, N., Dragan, A.D., Pivtoraiko, M., Klingensmith, M., Dellin, C.M., Bagnell, J.A., Srinivasa, S.S., 2013. CHOMP: covariant Hamiltonian optimization for motion planning. Int. J. Robot. Res. 32 (9–10), 1164–1193.

252
This is a resupply of March 2023 as the template used in the publication of the original article contained errors. The content of the article has remained unaffected.

