2022-12-27
Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo
Taylor Howell1,2, Nimrod Gileadi2, Saran Tunyasuvunakool2, Kevin Zakka2,3, Tom Erez2 and Yuval Tassa2 1Stanford University, 2DeepMind, 3University of California Berkeley

arXiv:2212.00541v2 [cs.RO] 24 Dec 2022

We introduce MuJoCo MPC (MJPC), an opensource, interactive application and software framework for real-time predictive control, based on MuJoCo physics. MJPC allows the user to easily author and solve complex robotics tasks, and currently supports three shooting-based planners: derivative-based iLQG and Gradient Descent, and a simple derivative-free method we call Predictive Sampling. Predictive Sampling was designed as an elementary baseline, mostly for its pedagogical value, but turned out to be surprisingly competitive with the more established algorithms. This work does not present algorithmic advances, and instead, prioritises performant algorithms, simple code, and accessibility of model-based methods via intuitive and interactive software. MJPC is available at github.com/deepmind/mujoco_mpc, a video summary can be viewed at dpmd.ai/mjpc.

1. Introduction

M-

approaches form the founda-

tion of classical control and robotics. Since

Kalman’s seminal work [Kalman, 1960], the state

along with its dynamics and observation models

has played a central role.

The classical approach is being challenged by learning-based methods, which forgo the explicit description of the state and associated models, letting internal representations emerge from the learning process [Lillicrap et al., 2015, Schulman et al., 2017, Salimans et al., 2017, Smith et al., 2022, Rudin et al., 2022]. The ﬂexibility aﬀorded by learned representations makes these methods powerful and general, but the requirement for large amounts of data and computation makes them slow. In contrast, pure model-based methods, like the ones described below, can synthesise behaviour in real time [Tassa et al., 2014].

Since both approaches ultimately generate behaviour by optimising an objective, there is reason to believe they can be eﬀectively combined. Indeed, well-known discrete-domain breakthroughs

like AlphaGo [Silver et al., 2016] are predicated on combining model-based search and learningbased value and policy approximation. We believe the same could happen for robotics and control, and describe our thinking on how this might happen in the Discussion (Section 5). However, before the community can rise to this challenge, a core problem must be overcome: Model-based optimisation is diﬃcult to implement, often depends on elaborate optimisation algorithms, and is generally inaccessible.
To address this deﬁcit, we present MJPC, an open-source interactive application and software framework for predictive control, based on MuJoCo physics [Todorov et al., 2012], which lets the user easily author and solve complex tasks using predictive control algorithms in real time. The tool oﬀers implementations of standard derivativebased algorithms: iLQG (second-order planner) and Gradient Descent (ﬁrst-order planner). Additionally, it introduces Predictive Sampling, a simple zero-order, sampling-based algorithm that works surprisingly well and is easy to understand.
Importantly, the interactive simulation can be slowed down asynchronously, speeding up the planner with respect to simulation time. This means that behaviours can be generated on older, slower machines, leading to a democratisation of predictive control tooling.
MJPC and Predictive Sampling advance our central goal of lowering the barriers to entry for predictive control in robotics research. An important secondary goal is to accelerate research velocity. When tweaking a parameter, a researcher should not need to wait hours or minutes, but should receive instantaneous feedback – which will measurably enhance their own cognitive performance [Lu and Dosher, 2022]. We believe that ﬂexible, interactive simulation with researcher-authored graphical user interface is not just a “nice to have”, but a prerequisite for advanced robotics research.

Corresponding author(s): thowell@stanford.edu, tassa@deepmind.com © 2022 DeepMind. All rights reserved

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

2. Background
I this section we provide a general background on Optimal Control and Trajectory Optimisation, then focus on Predictive Control and derivative-free optimisation.

Optimal control. Optimal Control means choos-
ing actions in order to minimise future costs (equi-
valently, to maximise future returns). A dynamical system with state 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛, which takes a userchosen control (or action) 𝑢 ∈ R𝑚, evolves according to the discrete-time1 dynamics:

𝑦 = 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑢),

(1)

returning a new state, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛. The behaviour of the system is encoded via the running cost:

𝑐(𝑥, 𝑢),

(2)

a function of state and control, where explicit timedependence can be realised by folding time into the state. Future costs (a.k.a cost-to-go or value), can be deﬁned in several ways. The summation can continue to inﬁnity, leading to the average-cost or discounted-cost formulations, favoured in temporaldiﬀerence learning, which we discuss in Section 5. Here we focus on the ﬁnite-horizon formulation, whereby the optimisation objective 𝐽 is given by:

∑𝑇︁

𝐽 (𝑥0:𝑇 , 𝑢0:𝑇 ) = 𝑐(𝑥𝑡, 𝑢𝑡),

(3)

𝑡=0

where subscripts indicated discrete-time indices.

Algorithm 1 Predictive Control (asynchronous) Agent: (repeat)
1: Read the current action 𝑢 from the nominal plan Π, apply it to the controlled system.
Planner: (repeat) 1: Measure the current state 𝑥. 2: Using the nominal Π to warm-start, optimise
the ﬁnite-horizon objective 𝐽. 3: Update Π.
which is usually solved with general-purpose software [Wächter and Biegler, 2006, Gill et al., 2005]. They have the important beneﬁt that non-physically-realisable trajectories can be represented, for example in order to clamp a ﬁnal state, without initially knowing how to get to it. • Shooting methods like Diﬀerential Dynamic Programming [Jacobson and Mayne, 1970] use only the controls 𝑢0:𝑇 as decision variables and enforce the dynamics via forward simulation. In the shooting approach only physicallyrealisable trajectories can be considered, but they beneﬁt from the reduced search space and from the optimiser not having to enforce the dynamics. The latter beneﬁt is especially important for stiﬀ systems like those with contact, where the diﬀerence between a physical and non-physical trajectory can be very small2. Unlike direct methods which require dynamics derivatives, shooting methods can employ derivative-free optimisation, as discussed below.

Trajectory optimisation. Solving the ﬁnitehorizon optimal control problem (1, 3), i.e., optimising a ﬁxed-length trajectory, is commonly known as planning or trajectory optimisation. These algorithms [Von Stryk and Bulirsch, 1992, Betts, 1998] have a rich history reaching back to the Apollo Program [NASA, 1971, Smith and Yound, 1967]. An important distinction can be made between two classes of algorithms:
• Direct or simultaneous methods have both states and controls as decision variables and enforce the dynamics (1) as constraints. These methods (e.g., Von Stryk [1993]) specify a large, sparse optimisation problem,
1The continuous-time formulation is generally equivalent, we choose discrete time for notation simplicity.

Predictive control. The key idea of Predictive Control, invented in the late 60s and ﬁrst published in [Richalet et al., 1978], is to use trajectory optimisation in real-time as the system dynamics are evolving. This class of algorithm has been successfully deployed in numerous real-world settings including: chemical and nuclear process control [Na et al., 2003, Lopez-Negrete et al., 2013], navigation for autonomous vehicles [Falcone et al., 2007], and whole-body control of humanoid robots [Kuindersma et al., 2016].
In the real-time setting, the current state 𝑥 needs to be estimated or measured, and the trajectory
2For example, consider the physical scenario of a free rigid box lying ﬂat on a plane under gravity, and then consider the non-physical scenario of the same box hovering above the plane or penetrating it by a few microns.

2

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

optimiser is required to return a set of optimal or near-optimal controls for the ﬁnite-horizon (here often called the receding horizon) problem, starting at 𝑥. We use Π to denote the plan, the ﬁnitehorizon policy. In the context of shooting methods Π = 𝑢0:𝑇 , though as we discuss later, in some cases it can be re-parameterised, rather than using the discrete-time control sequence directly. Predictive control is best thought of in terms of two asynchronous processes, the agent and the planner, see Algorithm 1.
Predictive Control has the following notable properties:
• Faster computation improves performance. The reason for this is clear, the more optimisation steps the planner can take in one unit of time, the better the optimised control sequences will be.
• Warmstarting has a large beneﬁcial eﬀect. By reusing the plan from the previous planning step, the optimiser only needs to make small modiﬁcations in order to correct for the changes implied by the new state. Warmstarting also leads to an amortisation of the optimisation process across multiple planning steps.
• The optimisation is not required to converge, only to improve, see Section 5.1.
• Tasks with a behaviour timescale much longer than the planning horizon 𝑇 are often still solvable, though this property is task dependent.
• Predictive controllers can easily get stuck in local minima, especially those using derivatives. This is due to the myopic nature of the optimisation, and can be addressed by terminating the rollout with a value function approximation, see Section 5.3.
Derivative-free optimisation. One of the main reasons for our initial focus on shooting methods is their ability to make use of derivative-free optimisation, also known as sampling-based optimisation [Audet and Hare, 2017]. Despite not leveraging problem structure or gradient information, this class of algorithms can discover complex behaviours [Salimans et al., 2017, Mania et al., 2018].
Sampling-based methods maintain a search distribution over policy parameters and evaluate the objective at sampled points in order to ﬁnd an improved solution. Popular algorithms in-

clude: random search [Matyas, 1965], genetic algorithms [Holland, 1992], and evolutionary strategies [Rechenberg, 1973], including CMA-ES [Hansen and Ostermeier, 2001].
This class of algorithms has a number of desirable properties. First, because derivative information is not required, they are well-suited for tasks with non-smooth and discontinuous dynamics. Second, these methods are trivially parallelisable.
Sampling-based methods have been used in the predictive control context, but not very widely. Notable exceptions are Hämäläinen’s work [Hämäläinen et al., 2014, 2015], which is an early precursor to MJPC, and the oeuvre of Theodorou including [Williams et al., 2017] and related papers. While these methods are usually considered to be sample ineﬃcient, we explain below why, speciﬁcally in the predictive control context, they can be surprisingly competitive.
3. MuJoCo MPC (MJPC)
W introduce MJPC, an open-source interactive application and software framework for predictive control, that lets the user easily synthesise behaviours for complex systems using predictive control algorithms in real time. Behaviours are speciﬁed by simple, composable objectives that are risk-aware. The planners, including: Gradient Descent, Iterative Linear Quadratic Gaussian (iLQG), and Predictive Sampling are implemented in C++ and extensively utilise multi-threading for parallel rollouts. The framework is asynchronous, enabling simulation slow-down and emulation of a faster controller, allowing this tool to run on slow machines. An intuitive graphical user-interface enables real-time interactions with the environment and the ability to modify task parameters, planner and model settings, and to instantly see the eﬀects of the modiﬁcations. The tool is available at: https://github.com/deepmind/mujoco_mpc.
3.1. Physics Simulation
We build MJPC using the API of the open-source physics engine MuJoCo [Todorov et al., 2012]. MuJoCo is a good infrastructure for an interactive framework for robotics algorithms for two main reasons: ﬁrst, MuJoCo supports simulating multiple candidate future trajectories in parallel by oﬀering a thread-safe API, which maximises the

3

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

1 𝜌 0.5

𝑅 = −2 𝑅 = −1 𝑅= 0 𝑅= 1 𝑅= 2

Whittle, 1981]. The ﬁnal running cost 𝑐 is given by:
𝑐(𝑥, 𝑢) = 𝜌(𝑙(𝑥, 𝑢); 𝑅) = 𝑒𝑅·𝑙(𝑥,𝑢) − 1 (5) 𝑅
The scalar parameter 𝑅 ∈ R denotes risk-sensitivity. 𝑅 = 0 (the default) is interpreted as risk-neutral, 𝑅 > 0 as risk-averse, and 𝑅 < 0 as risk-seeking. The mapping 𝜌 (see Figure 1) has the following properties:

0

0

0.5

1

𝑙

Figure 1 | Risk transformation 𝜌(𝑙; 𝑅). The function
is evaluated between 0 and 1 for diﬀerent values of the risk parameter 𝑅.

utilisation of modern multi-core CPU architectures; second, MuJoCo aﬀords faster-than-realtime simulation of high-dimensional systems with many contacts — for example, the humanoid (a 27-DoF system) can be simulated 4000 times faster than realtime on a single CPU thread.

3.2. Objective
MJPC provides convenient utilities to easily design and compose costs in order to specify an objective (3); as well as automatically and eﬃciently compute derivatives.

• Deﬁned and smooth for any 𝑅.

• If 𝑅 = 0, is the identity 𝜌(𝑙; 0) = 𝑙 (in the

limit).

• Zero is a ﬁxed point: 𝜌(0; 𝑅) = 0.

• The derivative at 0 is 1: 𝜕𝜌(0; 𝑅)/𝜕𝑙 = 1.

• Non-negative: If 𝑙 ≥ 0 then 𝜌(𝑙; 𝑅) ≥ 0.

• Monotonic: 𝜌(𝑙; 𝑅) > 𝜌(𝑧; 𝑅) if 𝑙 > 𝑧.

•

If

𝑅

< 0 then

𝜌 is bounded:

𝜌(𝑙; 𝑅)

< −1.
𝑅

• 𝜌(𝑙; 𝑅) carries the same units as 𝑙.

Note that for negative 𝑅, the transformation 𝜌 creates costs that are similar to the bounded rewards commonly used in reinforcement learning. For example, when using the quadratic norm n(𝑟) = 𝑟𝑇𝑊𝑟 for some SPD matrix 𝑊 = Σ−1 and a risk parameter 𝑅 = −1, we get an invertedGaussian cost 𝑐 = 1 − 𝑒−𝑟𝑇 Σ−1𝑟, whose minimisation is equivalent to maximum-likelihood maximisation of the Gaussian. This leads to the interesting interpretation of the bounded rewards commonly used in RL as risk-seeking. We do not investigate this relationship further in this paper.

Costs. We use a “base cost” of the form:

∑𝑀︁

𝑙(𝑥, 𝑢) = 𝑤𝑖 · n𝑖 𝑟𝑖 (𝑥, 𝑢) .

(4)

𝑖=0

This cost is a sum of 𝑀 terms, each comprising:

• A nonnegative weight 𝑤 ∈ R+ determining the
relative importance of this term. • A twice-diﬀerentiable norm n(·) : R𝑝 → R+,
which takes its minimum at 0𝑝. • The residual 𝑟 ∈ R𝑝 is a vector of elements
that are “small when the task is solved”.

Risk sensitivity. We augment the base cost (4) with a risk-aware exponential scalar transformation, 𝜌 : R+ ×R → R, corresponding to the classical risk-sensitive control framework [Jacobson, 1973,

Derivatives. MuJoCo provides a utility for computing ﬁnite-diﬀerence (FD) Jacobians of the dynamics, which is eﬃcient in two ways. First, by avoiding re-computation where possible, for example when diﬀerencing w.r.t. controls, quantities that depend only on positions and velocities are not recomputed. Second, because FD computational costs scale with the dimension of the input, outputs can be added cheaply. MuJoCo’s step function 𝑦, 𝑟 = 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑢), computes both the next state 𝑦 and sensor values 𝑟, deﬁned in the model. Because the FD approximation of the Jacobians,
𝜕𝑦 𝜕𝑦 𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑥 , 𝜕𝑢 , 𝜕𝑥 , 𝜕𝑢 , (6)
scales like the combined dimension of 𝑥 and 𝑢, adding more sensors 𝑟 is eﬀectively “free”. MJPC automatically and eﬃciently computes cost derivatives as follows.

4

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

𝑢

Zero Linear Cubic Knots
𝜏
Figure 2 | Time-indexed spline representation of the controls. Parameter points (black) utilised to construct: zero (magenta), linear (orange), and cubic (blue) interpolants.

Gradients. Cost gradients are computed with:

𝜕𝑐 = 𝑒𝑅𝑙 𝜕𝑙 = 𝑒𝑅𝑙 ∑𝑀︁ 𝑤 𝜕n𝑖 𝜕𝑟𝑖 𝑖 ,

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑥

𝑖=0

𝜕𝑐 = 𝑒𝑅𝑙 𝜕𝑙 = 𝑒𝑅𝑙 ∑𝑀︁ 𝑤 𝜕n𝑖 𝜕𝑟𝑖 𝑖 .

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑢

𝑖=0

(7a) (7b)

The norm gradients, 𝜕n/𝜕𝑟, are computed analytically.

Hessians. Second-order derivatives use the
Gauss-Newton approximation, ignoring second derivatives of 𝑟:

𝜕2 𝑐

∑𝑀︁
𝑅𝑙

𝜕𝑟𝑖 𝑇 𝜕2n𝑖 𝜕𝑟𝑖

𝜕𝑙 𝑇 𝜕𝑙

≈𝑒

𝑤𝑖

2 +𝑅

, (8a)

𝜕𝑥2

𝜕𝑥 𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑥 𝜕𝑥 𝜕𝑥

𝑖=0

𝜕2 𝑐

∑𝑀︁
𝑅𝑙

𝜕𝑟𝑖 𝑇 𝜕2n𝑖 𝜕𝑟𝑖

𝜕𝑙 𝑇 𝜕𝑙

≈𝑒

𝑤𝑖

2 +𝑅

, (8b)

𝜕𝑢2

𝜕𝑢 𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑢 𝜕𝑢 𝜕𝑢

𝑖=0

𝜕2 𝑐

∑𝑀︁
𝑅𝑙

𝜕𝑟𝑖 𝑇 𝜕2n𝑖 𝜕𝑟𝑖

𝜕𝑙 𝑇 𝜕𝑙

≈𝑒

𝑤𝑖

2 +𝑅

. (8c)

𝜕𝑥𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑥 𝜕𝑟 𝜕𝑢 𝜕𝑥 𝜕𝑢

𝑖=0

The norm Hessians, 𝜕2n/𝜕𝑟2, are computed analytically.

3.3. Splines
As we explain below, planners like iLQG require the direct control-sequence representation 𝑢0:𝑇 due to the requirements of the Bellman Principle. Without this constraint, controls can be “compressed” into a lower-dimensional object. There are many ways

Algorithm 2 iLQG
Require: initial state 𝑥0, nominal plan Π = 𝑢0:𝑇 1: Roll out nominal trajectory from 𝑥0 using Π 2: Compute action improvements and feedback
policy using Dynamic Programming. 3: Roll out parallel line search with feedback
policy (11). 4: Best actions are new nominal actions.

to do this, we picked the simplest: splines. Ac-
tion trajectories are represented as a time-indexed
set of knots, or control-points, parameterised by a sequence of monotonic time points 𝜏0:𝑃 and parameter values 𝜃0:𝑃, where we use the shorthand 𝜃 = 𝜃0:𝑃. Given a query point 𝜏, the evaluation of the spline is given by:

𝑢 = 𝑠 𝜏; (𝜏0:𝑃, 𝜃) .

(9)

We provide three spline implementations: traditional cubic Hermite splines, piecewise-linear interpolation, and zero-order hold. See (Fig. 2) for an illustration.
The main beneﬁt of compressed representations like splines is that they reduce the search space. They also smooth the control trajectory, which is often desirable. Spline functions belong to the class of linear bases, which includes the Fourier basis and orthogonal polynomials. These are useful because they allow easy propagation of gradients from the direct representation 𝜕Π back to the parameter values 𝜕𝜃. In our case this amounts to computing:
𝜕𝑠 𝜕𝜃 , (10)
which has a simple analytic formula (see code for details). Unlike other linear bases, splines have the convenient property that bounding the values 𝜃 also bounds the spline trajectory. This is exactly true for the zero and linear interpolations, and mostly-true for cubic splines. Bounding is important as most physical systems clamp controls to bounds, and there is no point searching outside of them. Expressions for cubic, linear and zero interpolations are provided in Appendix A.

3.4. Planners MJPC includes two derivative-based planners.

5

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

Algorithm 3 Gradient Descent
Require: initial state 𝑥0, nominal plan Π(𝜃) 1: Roll out nominal from 𝑥0 using Π(𝜃) 2: Compute 𝜕𝐽/𝜕Π with (14) 3: Compute 𝜕𝐽/𝜕𝜃 with (13)
4: Roll out parallel line-search with (12) 5: Pick the best one: 𝜃 ← argmin 𝐽 (𝜃(𝑖) )

Algorithm 4 Predictive Sampling
Parameters: 𝑁 rollouts, noise scale 𝜎
Require: initial state 𝑥0, nominal plan Π(𝜃) 1: Get 𝑁 −1 samples 𝜃𝑖 ∼ N (𝜃, 𝜎2) 2: Including 𝜃, roll out all 𝑁 samples from 𝑥0 3: Pick the best one: 𝜃 ← argmin 𝐽 (𝜃(𝑖) )

iLQG. The iLQG3 planner [Tassa et al., 2012], a Gauss-Newton approximation of the DDP algorithm [Jacobson and Mayne, 1970], utilises ﬁrstand second-order derivative information to take an approximate Newton step over the open-loop control sequence 𝑢0:𝑇 via dynamic programming [Kalman, 1964], producing a time-varying linear feedback policy:

𝑢𝑡 = 𝑢¯𝑡 + 𝐾𝑡 (𝑥𝑡 − 𝑥¯𝑡) + 𝛼𝑘𝑡.

(11)

The nominal, or current best trajectory, is denoted with overbars (¯), 𝐾 is a feedback gain matrix, and 𝑘 is an improvement to the current action trajectory. A parallel line search over the step size 𝛼 ∈ [𝛼min, 1] is performed to ﬁnd the best improvement. Additional enhancements include a constrained backward pass [Tassa et al., 2014] that enforces action limits and adaptive regularisation. The details of iLQG are too involved to restate here, we refer the reader to the references above for details.

Gradient descent. This ﬁrst-order planner, known as Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle [Mangasarian, 1966], utilises gradient information to improve action sequences, here represented as splines. The gradient of the total return is used to update the spline parameters, using a parallel line search over the step size 𝛼 ∈ [𝛼min, 𝛼max]:

𝜕𝐽 𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝛼 𝜕𝜃 .

(12)

The total gradient is given by:

𝜕𝐽 = 𝜕𝐽 𝜕Π , 𝜕𝜃 𝜕Π 𝜕𝜃

(13)

where the spline gradient 𝜕Π/𝜕𝜃 is given by (10), while 𝜕𝐽/𝜕Π is computed with the Maximum Principle. Letting 𝜆 denote the co-state, the gradients

3Equivalently, “iLQR”, since we don’t make use of the noisesensitive term for which iLQG was originally developed [Li and Todorov, 2004]. We keep the name “iLQG” due to its provenance.

with respect to 𝑢 are given by:

𝜕𝑐 𝜆 𝑗 = 𝜕𝑥𝑗 + 𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝑐 𝜕𝑢𝑗 = 𝜕𝑢𝑗 +

𝜕𝑓 𝑇 𝜕𝑥 𝑗 𝜆 𝑗+1, 𝜕𝑓 𝑇 𝜕𝑢 𝑗 𝜆 𝑗+1.

(14a) (14b)

The primary advantage of this ﬁrst-order method compared to a computationally more expensive method like iLQG is that optimisation is performed over the smaller space of spline parameters, instead of the entire (non-parametric) sequences of actions.

Predictive Sampling. This is a trivial, zero-order, sampling-based Predictive Control method that works well and is easy to understand. Designed as an elementary baseline, this algorithm turned out to be surprisingly competitive with the more elaborate derivative-based algorithms.

Algorithm. A nominal sequence of actions, represented with spline parameters, is iteratively improved using random search [Matyas, 1965]. At each iteration, 𝑁 candidate splines are evaluated: the nominal itself and 𝑁 − 1 noisy samples from a Gaussian with the nominal as its mean and ﬁxed standard deviation 𝜎. After sampling, the actions are clamped to the control limits by clamping the spline parameters 𝜃. Each candidate’s total return is evaluated and the nominal is updated with the best candidate. See Algorithm 4 and pseudocode in Appendix C. Predictive Sampling is not innovative or performant, but is presented as a simple baseline, see Discussion below.

4. Results
W provide a short textual description of our graphical user interface (GUI) for three example tasks. They are best understood by viewing the associated video at dpmd.ai/mjpc or better yet, by downloading the software and interacting with it.

6

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

4.1. Graphical User Interface
The MJPC GUI, shown and described in Fig. 3, provides an interactive simulation environment, as well as modules containing live plots and parameters that can be set by the researcher. The intuitive interface makes policy design easy by enabling the researcher to interactively change cost parameters or planner settings and immediately see the results in both the simulation environment and live plots, allowing fast debugging and an enhanced understanding of the factors that inﬂuence behaviour.
4.2. Examples
In the following examples, we demonstrate the ability to synthesise complex locomotion and manipulation behaviours for a variety of high-dimensional systems in simulation on a single CPU. Further, we demonstrate that the behaviours are robust to disturbances and mismatch between the simulation and planning model, and can adapt extremely quickly in new scenarios. For all of the examples, the total planning time for a single update is between 1 and 20 milliseconds. We highlight three examples below and provide additional examples with the software. Experimental details for objectives and planner settings are found in the Appendix B.
Humanoid. This 27-DOF human-like system, from DeepMind Control Suite [Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020], has 21 actions and is tasked with standing. The system can be initialised on the ﬂoor and quickly stands in a manner that is robust to large disturbances. If a suﬃciently large disturbance knocks the humanoid onto the ﬂoor, the system will stand back up (Fig. 4a).
Quadruped. A Unitree A1 quadruped [Unitree, 2022], from MuJoCo Menagerie [MuJoCo Menagerie Contributors, 2022], exhibits agile behaviour to traverse uneven terrain which includes walking over a steep slope. On slower machines, the quadruped often struggles to ascend. In this scenario, the simulation slow down can be eﬀectively utilised to provide the planner with addition simulation time to plan a successful climb. The system is also capable of rolling oﬀ its back and standing up (Fig. 4b). In order to perform long-horizon tasks like continuously navigating the terrain, a series of target poses are set. Once a goal is reached, an

automatic transition occurs and the next target is set.
Hand. A Shadow Hand [Tuﬃeld and Elias, 2003], also from MuJoCo Menagerie, performs in-hand manipulation of a cube to a desired orientation (Fig. 4c), where this goal can be set by the researcher in real-time by interactively setting the target orientation. In-hand reorientation—a high-DoF system with complex contact dynamics— is considered diﬃcult to solve [Chen et al., 2022] and to the best of our knowledge has not previously been solved from scratch, in real time.
5. Discussion
T thrust of this paper is to make predictive control accessible via customisable, interactive, open-source tooling. We believe that responsive, GUI-based tools are a prerequisite for accelerated robotics research, and that due to their importance, these tools should be modiﬁable and the inner workings transparent to the researcher. We hope that our MJPC project will be embraced by the community, and look forward to improving and extending it together.
5.1. Predictive Sampling
The eﬀectiveness of this simple method suggests that fast, approximate optimisation can be competitive with more sophisticated methods which return better solutions but at a lower rate. Does the higher planning rate completely explain this surprising eﬀectiveness? We believe there is another, subtler reason. Predictive Control is not well-described by the tenets of traditional optimisation. For example, it usually makes no sense to take more than one step of optimisation. Once a single iteration is complete, it is more important to measure a new value of the state and re-plan, than it is to continue to converge to the minimum of an already-outdated problem. The constant shifting of the optimisation landscape makes Predictive Control a qualitatively diﬀerent problem, more like surﬁng than mountain climbing. The goal is not to ﬁnd the minimum, but to remain in the basinof-attraction of the minimum. This is a diﬀerent, weaker criterion, at which simple algorithms fair better than when measured by the traditional yardstick of convergence.
To be clear, Predictive Sampling is not a novel

7

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

Figure 3 | Graphical User Interface. The left tab includes modules for Tasks and the Agent. In the Task module, models are selected from a drop-down menu and the risk value is set; cost weights and residual parameters are speciﬁed with interactive sliders. The Agent module provides access to a drop-down menu for planners, settings, and switches that toggle the planner and controller. The right tab includes simulation readings and predictions for the cost, including individual terms, and actions. Live, planner-speciﬁc information and various compute time results are shown below. Traces of the current policy and sampled trajectories are visualised and the user can interactively pause or slow down the simulation and apply external forces and moments to the system.

algorithm; instead, it is a baseline. A corner-case of many existing methods, it can variously be described as “MPPI with inﬁnite temperature”, “CEM with a non-adaptive distribution” or just “trivial random search”. Better algorithms exist, but none are so easy to describe or implement. We are introducing Predictive Sampling not because it is good, but because it is not good. It is the simplest possible sampling-based shooting method, and therefore establishes a lower bound for performance baselines.
5.2. Use cases
Before we discuss limitations and their possible resolutions, it is worth asking how can MJPC be used now, as it is described above?
1. Task design. MJPC makes it easy to add new

tasks, expose task parameters to the GUI, and quickly generate the desired behaviour. The task can then be re-implemented in any other framework of choice. While we have not yet implemented time-dependent tasks, it is possible and easy; we expect MJPC to work especially well for motion-tracking tasks. 2. Data generation. MJPC can be used to generate data for learning-based approaches, i.e., it can act like an “expert policy”. In this context, it is often the case that the model and task from which the data is generated do not have to exactly match the one used by the learner, and the data can likely be useful for a wide range of setups. 3. Predictive Control research. For researchers interested in Predictive Control itself, MJPC provides an ideal playground. MJPC can

8

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

(a) Humanoid standing up oﬀ the ﬂoor. (b) Quadruped rolling oﬀ its back to stand up.

(c) Hand manipulating a cube to a goal orientation. Figure 4 | Behaviours generated with MuJoCo MPC. Time progresses left to right.

switch planners on-the-ﬂy, and its asynchronous design aﬀords a fair comparison by correctly accounting for and rewarding faster planners.
5.3. Limitation and Future Work
Can only control what MuJoCo can simulate. This is a general limitation of Predictive Control and is in fact stronger since one can only control what can be simulated much faster than real-time. For example, it is diﬃcult to imagine any simulation of a very-high-DoF system, like ﬂuid, cloth or soft bodies advancing so fast. One solution is improved simulation using a combination of traditional physics modeling and learning, e.g., [Ladicky et al., 2017]. Another possibility is to entirely learn the dynamics from observations. This approach, often termed Model Based Reinforcement Learning is showing great promise [Heess et al., 2015, Nagabandi et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2022]. We would recommend that where possible, when attempting Predictive Control using learned dynamics models, a traditional simulator be employed as a fallback as in [Schrittwieser et al.,

2020], to disambiguate the eﬀects of modeling errors.
Myopic. The core limitation of Predictive Control is that it is myopic and cannot see past the ﬁxed horizon. This can be ameliorated in three conceptually straightforward ways:
1. Learned policies. By adding a learned policy, information from past episodes can propagate to the present via policy generalisation [Byravan et al., 2021]. This approach is attractive since it can only improve performance: when rolling out samples, one also rolls out the proposal policy. If the rollout is better, it becomes the new nominal. A learned policy is also expected to lead to more stereotypical, periodic behaviours, which are important in locomotion.
2. Value functions. Terminating the rollout with a learned value function which estimates the remaining cost-to-go is the obvious way by which to increase the eﬀective horizon. Combining learned policies and value functions

9

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

with model-based search would amount to an “AlphaGo for control” [Silver et al., 2016, Springenberg et al., 2020]. 3. High-level agent. A predictive controller could be used as the low-level module in a hierarchical control setup. In this scenario, the actions of the high-level agent have the semantics of setting the cost function of the predictive controller. The predictive controller remains myopic while the high-level agent contains the long-horizon “cognitive” aspects of the task. A beneﬁt of this scenario is that the high-level actions have a much lower frequency than required for low-level control (e.g., torques).
Hardware. MJPC is aimed at robotics research, which raises the question, can it be used to control hardware?
1. Transfer learning. As mentioned in 5.2, using MJPC to generate data which can then be transferred to a real robot is already possible.
2. Estimation. The most obvious yet diﬃcult route to controlling hardware is to follow in the footsteps of classic control and couple MJPC to an estimator providing real-time state estimates. In the rare cases where estimation is easy, for example with ﬁxed-base manipulators and static objects, controlling a robot directly with MJPC would be a straightforward exercise. The diﬃcult and interesting case involves free-moving bodies and contacts, as in locomotion and manipulation. For certain speciﬁc cases, like locomotion on ﬂat, uniform terrain, reasonable estimates should not be diﬃcult to obtain. For the general case, we believe that contact-aware estimation is possible following the approach of [Lowrey et al., 2014], but that remains to be seen. Relatedly, we believe that high-quality estimators also require the same kind of interactive, GUI-driven interface used by MJPC.

Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Piotr Trochim, Mehdi Mirza, Alessandro Davide Ialongo, Yuval Tassa, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Nicolas Heess, Josh Merel, et al. Evaluating model-based planning and planner amortization for continuous control. arXiv:2110.03363, 2021.
Tao Chen, Jie Xu, and Pulkit Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 297–307, 2022.
Paolo Falcone, Francesco Borrelli, Jahan Asgari, Hongtei Eric Tseng, and Davor Hrovat. Predictive active steering control for autonomous vehicle systems. IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology, 15(3):566–580, 2007.
Philip E. Gill, Walter Murray, and Michael A. Saunders. SNOPT: An SQP algorithm for large-scale constrained optimization. SIAM Review, 47(1): 99–131, 2005.
Perttu Hämäläinen, Sebastian Eriksson, Esa Tanskanen, Ville Kyrki, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Online motion synthesis using sequential Monte Carlo. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2014.
Perttu Hämäläinen, Joose Rajamäki, and C. Karen Liu. Online control of simulated humanoids using particle belief propagation. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2015.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution strategies. Evolutionary Computation, 9(2): 159–195, 2001.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Learning continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
John H. Holland. Genetic algorithms. Scientiﬁc American, 267(1):66–73, 1992.

References
Charles Audet and Warren Hare. Derivative-Free and Blackbox Optimization, volume 2. Springer, 2017.

David Jacobson. Optimal stochastic linear systems with exponential performance criteria and their relation to deterministic diﬀerential games. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 18(2):124– 131, 1973.

John T. Betts. Survey of numerical methods for trajectory optimization. Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, 21(2):193–207, 1998.

David H. Jacobson and David Q. Mayne. Diﬀerential Dynamic Programming. Number 24. Elsevier Publishing Company, 1970.

10

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

Rudolf E. Kalman. On the general theory of control systems. In International Conference on Automatic Control, pages 481–492, 1960.

competitive for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1800–1809, 2018.

Rudolf E. Kalman. When Is a Linear Control System Optimal? Journal of Basic Engineering, 86(1): 51–60, 1964.
Scott Kuindersma, Robin Deits, Maurice Fallon, Andrés Valenzuela, Hongkai Dai, Frank Permenter, Twan Koolen, Pat Marion, and Russ Tedrake. Optimization-based locomotion planning, estimation, and control design for the Atlas humanoid robot. Autonomous Robots, 40(3):429– 455, 2016.
Lubor Ladicky, SoHyeon Jeong, Nemanja Bartolovic, Marc Pollefeys, and Markus Gross. PhysicsForests: Real-time ﬂuid simulation using machine learning. In ACM SIGGRAPH Real Time Live!, page 22, 2017. ISBN 9781450350907.
Weiwei Li and Emanuel Todorov. Iterative linear quadratic regulator design for nonlinear biological movement systems. In International Conference on Informatics in Control, Automation and Robotics, pages 222–229, 2004.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa, David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Rodrigo Lopez-Negrete, Fernando J. D’Amato, Lorenz T. Biegler, and Aditya Kumar. Fast nonlinear model predictive control: Formulation and industrial process applications. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 51:55–64, 2013.
Kendall Lowrey, Svetoslav Kolev, Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Emanuel Todorov. Physicallyconsistent sensor fusion in contact-rich behaviors. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 1656–1662, 2014.
Zhong-Lin Lu and Barbara Anne Dosher. Current directions in visual perceptual learning. Nature Reviews Psychology, 1(11):654–668, 2022.
O. L. Mangasarian. Suﬃcient conditions for the optimal control of nonlinear systems. SIAM Journal on Control, 4(1):139–152, 1966.
Horia Mania, Aurelia Guy, and Benjamin Recht. Simple random search of static linear policies is

J. Matyas. Random optimization. Automation and Remote Control, 26(2):246–253, 1965.
MuJoCo Menagerie Contributors. MuJoCo Menagerie: A collection of high-quality simulation models for MuJoCo, 2022. URL
http://github.com/deepmind/mujoco_ menagerie.
Man Gyun Na, Sun Ho Shin, and Whee Cheol Kim. A model predictive controller for nuclear reactor power. Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 35 (5):399–411, 2003.
Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konolige, Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Deep dynamics models for learning dexterous manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1101–1112, 2020.
NASA. Apollo 11 Mission Report, volume 238. Scientiﬁc and Technical Information Oﬃce, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 1971.
Ingo Rechenberg. Evolutionsstrategie. Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien derbiologischen Evolution, 1973.
Jacques Richalet, André Rault, J. L. Testud, and J. Papon. Model predictive heuristic control: Applications to industrial processes. Automatica, 14(5):413–428, 1978.
Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Philipp Reist, and Marco Hutter. Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 91–100, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.

11

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. A walk in the park: Learning to walk in 20 minutes with model-free reinforcement learning. arXiv:2208.07860, 2022.
R. E. Smith and J. W. Yound. Trajectory optimization for an Apollo-type vehicle under entry conditions encountered during lunar return. Technical report, 1967.
Jost Tobias Springenberg, Nicolas Heess, Daniel Mankowitz, Josh Merel, Arunkumar Byravan, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jackie Kay, Jonas Degrave, Julian Schrittwieser, Yuval Tassa, et al. Local search for policy iteration in continuous control. arXiv:2010.05545, 2020.
Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Emanuel Todorov. Synthesis and stabilization of complex behaviors through online trajectory optimization. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 4906–4913, 2012.
Yuval Tassa, Nicolas Mansard, and Emo Todorov. Control-limited diﬀerential dynamic programming. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 1168–1175, 2014.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 5026–5033, 2012.
Paul Tuﬃeld and Hugo Elias. The Shadow robot mimics human actions. Industrial Robot: An International Journal, 2003.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel, Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval

Tassa. dm_control: Software and tasks for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020.

Unitree. Unitree A1 Quadruped. https://m. unitree.com/products/a1, 2022.

Oskar Von Stryk. Numerical solution of optimal control problems by direct collocation. In Optimal Control, pages 129–143. Springer, 1993.

Oskar Von Stryk and Roland Bulirsch. Direct and indirect methods for trajectory optimization. Annals of Operations Research, 37(1):357–373, 1992.

Andreas Wächter and Lorenz T. Biegler. On the implementation of an interior-point ﬁlter linesearch algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, 106(1): 25–57, 2006.

Peter Whittle.

Risk-sensitive lin-

ear/quadratic/Gaussian control. Advances

in Applied Probability, 13(4):764–777, 1981.

Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos A. Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control: From theory to parallel computation. Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, 40 (2):344–357, 2017.

Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. DayDreamer: World models for physical robot learning. arXiv:2206.14176, 2022.

Appendices

A. Interpolation
This section provides analytical expressions for computing interpolations. The indices 𝑗 and 𝑗 + 1 correspond to the indices of the domain variables which contain the query point 𝜏. These values are eﬃciently found using binary search in O (log(𝑛)) where 𝑛 is the dimension of the domain variable set.

Zero. The zero-order interpolation simply re-

turns the parameter values at the lower bound

index:

𝜃𝑗 ← 𝑠.

(15)

12

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

Linear. The linear interpolation returns: (1 − 𝑞) · 𝜃𝑗 + 𝑞 · 𝜃𝑗+1 ← 𝑠,
where 𝑞 = (𝜏 − 𝜏𝑗)/(𝜏𝑗+1 − 𝜏𝑗).

(16)

Cubic. The cubic interpolation leverages ﬁnitediﬀerence approximations of the slope at the interval points:

𝜙𝑗 = 1 2
𝜙𝑗+1 = 1 2

+ 𝜃𝑗+1 − 𝜃𝑗 𝜃𝑗 − 𝜃𝑗−1 , 𝜏 𝑗+1 − 𝜏 𝑗 𝜏 𝑗 − 𝜏 𝑗−1 + 𝜃𝑗+2 − 𝜃𝑗+1 𝜃𝑗+1 − 𝜃𝑗 , 𝜏 𝑗+2 − 𝜏 𝑗+1 𝜏 𝑗+1 − 𝜏 𝑗

(17) (18)

• Term 3:
r3: lateral center-of-mass velocity n3: smooth absolute value 𝑤3: 10
• Term 4:
r4: joint velocity n4: quadratic 𝑤4: 0.01
• Term 5:
r5: control eﬀort n5: quadratic 𝑤5: 0.025

and returns:
𝑎 · 𝜃𝑗 + 𝑏 · 𝜙𝑗 + 𝑐 · 𝜃𝑗+1 + 𝑑 · 𝜙𝑗+1 ← 𝑠,
where,
𝑎 = 2𝑞3 − 3𝑞2 + 1, 𝑏 = (𝑞3 − 2𝑞2 + 𝑞) · (𝜏𝑗+1 − 𝜏𝑗), 𝑐 = −2𝑞3 + 3𝑞2, 𝑑 = (𝑞3 − 𝑞2) · (𝜏𝑗+1 − 𝜏𝑗).

(19)
(20) (21) (22) (23)

B. Tasks
This section provides additional information about the examples provided in Section 4, including objective formulations and planner settings.

Humanoid objective. This task comprises 𝑀 = 6 cost terms:
• Term 0:
r0: lateral center-of-mass position and average lateral feet position alignment n0: hyperbolic cosine 𝑤0: 100
• Term 1:
r1: lateral torso position and lateral center-of-mass position alignment n1: smooth absolute value 𝑤1: 1
• Term 2:
– r2: head height and feet height diﬀerence minus target height diﬀerence
– n2: smooth absolute value – 𝑤2: 100

Quadruped objective. This task comprises 𝑀 = 4 cost terms:
• Term 0:
r0: body height and average feet height diﬀerence minus target height n0: quadratic 𝑤0: 1 • Term 1:
r1: body position minus goal position n1: quadratic 𝑤1: 5.0 • Term 2:
r2: body orientation minus goal orientation n2: quadratic 𝑤2: 1.0 • Term 3:
r3: control eﬀort n3: quadratic 𝑤3: 0.25
Hand objective. This task comprises 𝑀 = 3 cost terms:
• Term 0:
r0: cube position minus hand palm position n0: quadratic 𝑤0: 20 • Term 1:
r1: cube orientation minus goal orientation n1: quadratic

13

Predictive Sampling: Real-time Behaviour Synthesis with MuJoCo

𝑤1: 3
• Term 2:
r2: cube linear velocity n2: quadratic 𝑤2: 10

Xeon Gold 6154 72-core CPU. Additional experiments were performed on an Apple MacBook Pro (2021) with 16 GB of memory and an M1 Pro CPU.

Planner settings. We provide the settings used for Predictive Sampling in Table 1.

Table 1 | Predictive Sampling settings

Task

𝑃𝑁 𝑇

𝜎

Humanoid 3 10 23 0.125 Quadruped 3 10 35 0.25
Hand 6 10 25 0.1

C. Predictive Sampling Algorithm

Algorithm 5 PredictiveSampling

1: procedure O

P

2: task: 𝑓 , 𝑐, 𝑅

3: settings: 𝑇, 𝑁, 𝜎, 𝑠

4: initialise: (𝜏, 𝜃)

5: for 𝑘 = 0, . . . , ∞

6:

(𝑥, 𝜏) ← get state

7:

(𝜏¯, 𝜃) ← resample

8:

for 𝑖 = 0, . . . , 𝑁 (parallel)

˜(𝑖)

0,

𝑖 = 0,

9:

𝜃 =𝜃+

2

N (0, 𝜎 · 𝐼), else

10: 𝑥0(𝑖) = 𝑥, 𝜏0(𝑖) = 𝜏,

11:

for 𝑡 = 0, . . . , 𝑇

(𝑖)

(𝑖)

˜(𝑖)

12:

𝑢𝑡 = 𝑠(𝜏𝑡 ; (𝜏¯, 𝜃 ))

13: 𝑐𝑡(𝑖) = 𝑐(𝑥𝑡(𝑖) , 𝑢𝑡(𝑖) ; 𝑅)

14: (𝑥𝑡+1 (𝑖) , 𝜏𝑡+1 (𝑖) ) = 𝑓 (𝑥𝑡(𝑖) , 𝑢𝑡(𝑖) )

15:

end for

16:

end for

17:

𝜃 ← argmin 𝐽 (𝜃˜(𝑖) )

18: end for

19: end procedure

20: procedure A

FP

21: (𝑥, 𝜏) ← get state

22: 𝑢 = 𝑠(𝜏; (𝜏¯, 𝜃))

23: return 𝑢

24: end procedure

D. Compute Resources
Experiments were performed on a Lenovo ThinkStation P920 with 48GB of memory and an Intel

14

