1
Projection-Retraction MPPI: Exact Constraint-Manifold Control for Manipulators
Seulchan Lee1, Leesai Park1, Minhyeong Kang1, and Sanghyun Kim1,2,†

arXiv:2608.07573v1 [cs.RO] 4 Aug 2026

Abstract—Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control is widely used in manipulation for its gradient-free, parallel handling of non-convex costs. Manipulation tasks, however, often impose constraints that hold throughout the motion: a closed kinematic chain that two grasping arms keep exactly, or joint limits and obstacle clearances that are never crossed. MPPI handles such constraints only through the cost, as soft penalties that hold approximately and fail under a strong task cost. To address this, we propose Projection-Retraction MPPI (PR-MPPI), which enforces the constraints inside the sampled dynamics. At every rollout step, the sampled velocity is projected to satisfy both constraint types: the equality restricts it to a subspace, and each inequality to a half-space within that subspace, so inequality handling never breaks the equality. This projection, however, satisfies the constraints only to first order, and a finite step leaves a small drift off the equality. Therefore, we retract the returned command back onto the constraint to numerical tolerance and independent of task weighting. We validate PR-MPPI on 14DoF dual-arm systems. In simulation, the returned commands satisfy the closed-chain equality to numerical tolerance through a joint-limit stress test and randomized obstacle avoidance. On real hardware, the arms of a Unitree H1-2 humanoid reactively avoid a moving obstacle. Code and experiment videos are available at https://rcilab.github.io/prmppi.
I. INTRODUCTION
M ANY manipulation tasks must respect constraints throughout Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control [1], [2] is widely used in manipulation. It optimizes the task by sampling control sequences and weighting them by their rollout costs, requiring no gradients, which suits the non-convex, non-smooth costs induced by contact and clutter. The rollouts are also evaluated fast through massive GPU parallelization, as demonstrated by frameworks such as STORM [3]. Manipulation tasks, however, often impose constraints that hold throughout the motion, not merely at the goal. A wiping tool stays on the work surface. Two arms rigidly grasping an object form a closed kinematic chain whose relative pose holds exactly, or internal wrenches build up and the grasp is lost. All along the way, joint limits and obstacle
†Corresponding author: Sanghyun Kim. This work was supported in part by the Korea Planning & Evaluation Institute of Industrial Technology (KEIT) and the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea under Grant RS-2025-11082970; in part by the Research Program for Agriculture Science and Technology Development of the Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea, under Project RS-2026-25509723; and in part by the Korea Basic Science Institute (National Research Facilities and Equipment Center) grant funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT under Grant RS-2025-00564593. 1Seulchan Lee, Leesai Park, Minhyeong Kang and Sanghyun Kim are with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si 17104, Republic of Korea (e-mail: lee081847@khu.ac.kr; leesai2000@khu.ac.kr; kingtyphoon@khu.ac.kr; kim87@khu.ac.kr). 2Sanghyun Kim is also with the Institutes of Convergence Technology, Suwon-si 16229, Republic of Korea.

clearances are never crossed. MPPI handles constraints only through soft, penalty-based cost evaluation, and therefore cannot enforce a hard constraint.
To enforce constraints more strictly than a soft penalty, several lines of work augment MPPI with dedicated machinery on the inequality side. Chance-constrained and barrier-based formulations add probabilistic or forward-invariant safety [4]. In the same spirit, discrete-time control-barrier filters such as Shield-MPPI [5] repair the optimized control through a local barrier correction. A parallel line of work constrains the samples themselves rather than the cost. PRIEST [6] projects them toward collision- and kinematic-feasible sets, and MPPITan [7] redirects them along obstacle-gradient tangent spaces. CSC-MPPI [8] pushes them out of obstacles by primaldual gradient steps and selects the update from a DBSCAN cluster rather than a global average, while π-MPPI [9] projects the sampled inputs onto magnitude and smoothness bounds. Whether by barrier repair or by sample correction, however, these methods consider one-sided inequality margins only and offer no means of holding an equality.
Enforcing a kinematic equality along a motion has a long history outside sampling-based MPC. Classical redundancy resolution holds task equalities instantaneously by projecting joint velocities onto the constraint null space [10]–[13]. As a reactive one-step law, however, it performs no horizon optimization and offers no principled coupling to inequality margins. Sampling-based motion planners on constraint manifolds instead project or retract random configurations onto the manifold [14]–[16]. This yields feasible paths offline, but not a closed-loop policy that re-solves the problem at every control cycle. These literatures thus supply the core operations, projection and retraction, but neither embeds them in a sampling-based MPC loop.
Two recent controllers bring this machinery into MPPI, and are closest to our setting. DQ-MPPI [17] adopts the analytical route directly, projecting the samples onto the null space of the chain constraint. It handles the residual offmanifold drift only through null-space feedback at the low level, rather than removing it to a prescribed tolerance. The constraint is also confined to the dual-arm closed chain. MCMPPI [18] instead replaces the analytic constraint with a feasible manifold learned by a variational autoencoder. It samples within that manifold and corrects the selected command with a single quadratic-program step, which restores feasibility only approximately. Because the feasible set is a learned model, its reliability also depends on the training distribution and model accuracy. Both methods, moreover, enforce the equality only in the sampling stage and leave inequalities to the cost. As a result, neither returns an equality-feasible

PR-MPPI Controller

Sampling

Rollout Projection

1) Compute Tangent and Half-space

⋯
Cost Evaluation

Execution Projection

2) Equality Projection

2
Robot
Retraction 3) Inequality Correction

: CBF Half-space

: Equality Projection

: Active Set : In-active Set
(unchanged)

: Inequality Correction
: Projected Velocity

Fig. 1. Overview of PR-MPPI. Sampled control sequences are rolled out through the constraint-aware dynamics, where the active constraint projector Πact is applied at every step of every rollout. The filtered inputs are averaged by the exponential-weighted update, the averaged sequence is filtered once more along its own predicted states, and the first step is retracted onto M. The lower panels illustrate Πact on two rollout samples in three steps: (1) the tangent space of M and the CBF half-space of an active margin, (2) projection of the sampled inputs onto the tangent space, and (3) correction of the violating input within that tangent space, leaving the admissible one unchanged.

TABLE I CONSTRAINT HANDLING IN SAMPLING-BASED MPC.

Method

Ineq.a

Eq.a

Exactb

Freec

Shield-MPPI [5]

✓

×

×

✓

PRIEST [6]

✓

×

×

✓

π-MPPI [9]

✓

×

×

✓

MPPI-Tan [7]

✓

×

×

✓

CSC-MPPI [8]

✓

×

×

✓

MC-MPPI [18]

×

✓

×

×

DQ-MPPI [17]

×

✓

×

✓

PR-MPPI (ours)

✓

✓

✓

✓

a The constraint is enforced within the sampled rollouts or by a dedicated repair layer,

rather than only through a cost penalty. Eq. denotes a configuration-space equality

maintained throughout the motion. b The returned command satisfies the equality to numerical tolerance. c Constraint satisfaction does not require learned model.

command to numerical tolerance while handling inequality constraints together, and neither keeps an inequality correction from pushing the state off the equality. Table I summarizes this landscape.
To bridge this gap, we propose Projection-Retraction MPPI (PR-MPPI), which enforces equality and inequality constraints within the rollout itself rather than through the cost. At every rollout step, each sampled velocity passes through a single velocity-space projection: the equality confines it to the tangent subspace of the constraint manifold, and every active inequality confines it further to a half-space inside that subspace. The two are therefore not combined by weighting or priority but nested: an inequality correction stays inside the equality subspace by construction, for any activation pattern. This matters because a naive fix, such as clamping a joint at its limit, can silently break the closed chain. The projection, however, holds the constraints only to first order, and a finite step leaves a small drift off the equality. A retraction step therefore pulls the commanded state back onto the manifold to

the prescribed tolerance. Finally, the rollouts and the returned command pass through the same projection, so the plan is optimized under the same first-order constraint geometry that shapes the command.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: • We propose PR-MPPI, a constrained sampling-based
MPC framework in which a single velocity-space projection carries both constraint types inside the sampled dynamics: each active inequality is corrected within the equality tangent subspace, so inequality handling cannot break the equality regardless of which margins are active. A retraction step then removes the finite-step drift that the first-order projection leaves on the equality, returning the command to satisfy the equality to numerical tolerance. • We establish a command-level equality property and characterize the finite-step inequality error. Whenever the retraction terminates, the returned command satisfies the equality constraint to the prescribed numerical tolerance, independent of the MPPI weighting. Under the stated assumptions, the inequality error introduced by the finite step and the retraction is O(∆t2), small enough to be absorbed by the safety margin. • We validate PR-MPPI on a 14-DoF dual-arm Franka system in simulation, where the retracted commands satisfy the closed-chain equality to numerical tolerance while the measured trajectories retain the joint-limit and obstacle margins under aggressive task commands, and demonstrate reactive avoidance of a moving obstacle on the dual arms of a Unitree H1-2 humanoid.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present PR-MPPI, which incorporates equality and inequality constraints into MPPI through projection and retraction. During each sampled rollout, the perturbed

3

velocity is projected onto the intersection of the equalityconstraint tangent space and the active inequality half-spaces. After the MPPI update, the averaged sequence is filtered once more along its own predicted states, and the finite-step equality drift of the first command is removed by retracting the integrated configuration onto the constraint manifold. The overall framework is illustrated in Fig. 1.

A. Problem Definition
The control input is the joint velocity, ut = q˙t ∈ Rn. We consider the discrete-time system

qt+1 = f (qt, u˜t),

(1)

where qt ∈ Rn is the joint configuration and u˜t ∈ Rn is the stochastic control input. Our objective is to find an optimal nominal control sequence U = [u0, . . . , uT −1] over a prediction horizon T that minimizes the expected trajectory cost while satisfying both hard equality and inequality constraints under stochastic perturbations. The optimization problem is formulated as follows:

T −1

1T

min J = E ϕ(qT ) +
U

l(qt) + 2 ut Rut ,

t=0

s.t. c(qt) = 0, h(qt) ≥ 0,

(2)

u˜t = ut + δut, δut ∼ N (0, Σu),

q0 = qinit, qt+1 = f (qt, u˜t),

where c(qt) ∈ Rne and h(qt) ∈ Rni denote the equality and inequality constraints imposed on the joint space, respectively. The matrix R ∈ Rn×n is a positive-definite weight matrix penalizing the nominal control effort, and Σu ∈ Rn×n is the exploration covariance.

B. Constraint-Aware Sampled Dynamics

The constrained problem in (2) requires the sampled rollouts to respect both equality constraints and inequality margins. A direct penalty-based treatment is undesirable because a sufficiently large task cost can still make sampled trajectories violate the hard constraints. Instead of treating these constraints only through the cost, PR-MPPI projects each sampled velocity in velocity space before it enters the dynamics. The trajectory costs are then evaluated on near-feasible motions, so the MPPI average is formed over rollouts that pass through the same projection as the final control input. We first express both constraint types as conditions on the velocity and then define the filter and the resulting sampled dynamics.
The equality constraint defines the manifold

M = {q : c(q) = 0} ,

Jc(q) = ∂c ∈ Rne×n, (3) ∂q

and, to first order, a velocity control input u preserves the
constraint if and only if Jc(q)u = 0. For the inequalities, the desired safety buffer hsafe ∈ Rni , elementwise positive, is embedded directly into the inequality function, and the
shifted margins are kept nonnegative to first order by the CBF
condition:

h¯ (q) = h(q) − hsafe, Jh(q) u ≥ −Γ h¯ (q), (4)

where Jh(q) = ∂h¯ /∂q ∈ Rni×n and Γ = diag(γ1, . . . , γni ) with γi > 0. The shifted guard condition is h¯ (q) ≥ 0, and each row of the CBF condition bounds how fast the velocity

may approach the corresponding boundary. Both conditions

are linear in the input. The active constraint projector Πact updates the sampled input to its projection onto their intersec-

tion:

u˜+t

=

Πact (qt, u˜t)

=

arg min

1 2

∥u

−

u˜t∥2

u

s.t. Jc(qt)u = 0,

(5)

Jh(qt)u ≥ −Γ h¯ (qt).

The system dynamics in (1) then take the constraint-aware

form

qt+1 = fM (qt, u˜t) = qt + u˜+t ∆t,

(6)

and every sampled rollout is generated by (6). The rest of this subsection describes how (5) is computed inside the rollouts, in two stages: an equality tangent-space projection and an active inequality correction.
The first stage projects the sampled input onto the tangent space of M through the null-space projector:

u˜p,t = N (qt) u˜t, N (q) = I − Jc†(q)Jc(q), (7)

where

N

∈

Rn×n

is

the

null-space

projector

and

J†
c

the

pseudoinverse of Jc, so that Jc(qt)u˜p,t = 0. Since the feasible

set of (5) lies in the tangent space, the distances to u˜t and to u˜p,t differ there only by the constant ∥(I − N )u˜t∥2. The

second stage enforces the CBF half-spaces within this tangent

space. Since each sampled input violates only a few half-

spaces, if any, solving (5) with all ni half-spaces at every step

of every rollout is unnecessary. The projection is therefore

solved over a small active set that is grown only when needed

from the initial members selected by the CBF residual of each

margin at the equality-projected input:

ri (qt, u) = −γih¯i(qt) − ∇h¯i(qt)T u,

(8)

where ∇h¯i(q)T is the i-th row of Jh(q), and ri(qt, u) ≤ 0 recovers the i-th row of the CBF condition in (4). A positive residual means the input is pushing the rollout too fast toward the i-th margin. All violating margins and margins within the activation band form the initial active set,

(0)

¯

At = i : ri(qt, u˜p,t) > 0 or hi(qt) < hband .

(9)

Margins near the boundary are included preemptively through
the band, which covers half-spaces that the correction itself could push into violation. If At(0) = ∅, the equality-projected input already satisfies every half-space, so u˜+t = u˜p,t. Otherwise, at iteration ℓ, (5) is solved with only the half-spaces in At(ℓ), and by the KKT conditions its solution can be written as

ut(ℓ) = u˜p,t +

µi,t N (qt)∇h¯i(qt), µi,t ≥ 0, (10)

i∈At(ℓ)

where µi,t are the dual variables associated with the selected CBF half-spaces. By complementary slackness, a bandselected half-space that remains nonbinding at the solution has µi,t = 0. The residuals of the omitted half-spaces are then

4

checked at ut(ℓ). If any is violated, the most violated one is added,

At(ℓ+1) = At(ℓ) ∪

arg max ri(qt, ut(ℓ)) ,
i∈/At(ℓ)

(11)

and the restricted solve is repeated. The iteration terminates when every omitted residual satisfies ri(qt, ut(ℓ)) ≤ 0, and the final iterate is taken as u˜+t . At termination the iterate satisfies the selected half-spaces by construction and the omitted ones
by the check, so it is the minimizer of (5) with all ni halfspaces. Since every correction term carries N as a left factor and JcN = 0, applying Jc to (10) gives Jcu˜+t = Jcu˜p,t = 0: the filtered input preserves the equality to first order.
Each rollout generated by (6) is assigned the trajectory cost of (2), yielding {S(k)}Kk=1. Let U˜ +(k) = [u˜0+(k), . . . , u˜T −1 +(k)] denote the filtered input sequence of the k-th rollout. The
nominal sequence is then updated by exponential-weighted
averaging of the filtered sequences:

K
U ∗ = wk U˜ +(k),
k=1

wk ∝ exp − 1λ S(k) , (12)

where λ > 0 is the temperature parameter and the weights are normalized to sum to one.

C. Execution-Layer Projection and Retraction

The

MPPI

update

(12)

returns

U∗

=

[u∗0

,

.

.

.

,

u

∗ T

−1

]

by

exponential-weighted averaging of the projected inputs. Each

sample, however, was projected at the states of its own rollout,

so the averaged inputs carry no constraint guarantee along the trajectory that U ∗ itself generates. The averaged sequence

therefore requires filtering before actuation, and the system

dynamics (6) serve this role. Starting from the measured state q0, the sequence is rolled forward, and each input is filtered into the final control input for t = 0, . . . , T − 1:

ut⋆ = Πact (qt, u∗t ) .

(13)

This execution filtering corrects each input on the state it will actually visit, with the same projector as in the rollouts. The initial execution active set follows the same rule,

(0)

∗

¯

At = i : ri(qt, N ut ) > 0 or hi(qt) < hband ,

(14)

so simultaneously critical margins are enforced jointly, and

the active-set iteration (11) refines this set until every omitted

half-space is satisfied.

Although (13) enforces Jc(q0)u⋆0 = 0, this is a first-order

condition on the commanded input. Starting from q0 ∈ M,

the finite step therefore leaves c(q0 + ∆t u⋆0) = O(∆t2). We

remove

this

finite-step

drift

by

initializing

q

=

q0

+

∆t

u

⋆ 0

and applying the Gauss–Newton iteration

q ← q − Jc†(q) c(q) until ∥c(q)∥ < εtol. (15)

The iteration defines the retraction map RM, yielding the final command q+ = RM(q0 + ∆t u⋆0).
Remark 1 (Retraction exactness). The stopping rule of (15) makes the commanded tolerance a design property rather than a theorem: whenever the iteration terminates, the retracted

Algorithm 1 Projection-Retraction MPPI Framework

Require:

1: q0: Current measured configuration
2: U = [u0, . . . , uT −1]: Nominal control sequence
3: Σu: Exploration covariance
4: K, T : Number of samples and horizon 5: c, h¯ : Equality and shifted inequality constraints

6: for k = 1, . . . , K do 7: δu0:T −1 (k) ∼ N (0, Σu) 8: q0(k) ← q0 9: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do 10: u˜t(k) ← ut + δut(k) 11: u˜t+(k) ← Πact(qt(k), u˜t(k)) 12: qt+1 (k) ← qt(k) + u˜t+(k)∆t 13: end for
14: Evaluate trajectory cost S(k)

▷ Parallel sampling
▷ Eq. (5) ▷ Eq. (6)

15: end for

16: Compute exponential weights {w(k)}Kk=1 via (12)

17: U ∗ ← Kk=1 w(k)U˜ +(k)

▷ MPPI update

18: for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do

19:

u⋆
t

←

Πact(qt,

u∗t )

▷ Execution filtering, Eq. (13)

20:

qt+1

←

qt

+

u⋆
t

∆t

21: end for

22: q+ ← RM(q0 + ∆t u⋆0) 23: U ← [u⋆1, . . . , u⋆T −1, 0] 24: return q+

▷ Retraction ▷ Warm start

command satisfies ∥c(q+)∥ < εtol, independently of the task cost, the MPPI temperature and covariance, and the inequalityhandling parameters.

Lemma 1 (Finite-step margin bound). Let c and each h¯i be

twice continuously differentiable with bounded second deriva-

tives on the operating set, on which Jc has constant row rank and ∥Jc†∥ is bounded. Suppose that, at every control cycle, the

retraction (15) terminates at its tolerance, so that the executed

configuration satisfies ∥c(qt)∥ < εtol with εtol = O(∆t2).

Here

qt

denotes

the

configuration

at

cycle

t

and

u⋆
t

the

actuated input of that cycle. If (5) is feasible at qt at every cycle, ∥u⋆t ∥ ≤ u¯, ∥∇h¯i∥ ≤ L¯, and γi∆t ≤ 1, then there exist

constants κi ≥ 0, independent of ∆t, such that

h¯i(qt+1) ≥ (1 − γi∆t)h¯i(qt) − κi∆t2,

(16)

so h¯i(qt) ≥ 0 implies h¯i(qt+1) ≥ −κi∆t2.

Proof. ∥c(qt)∥ < εtol and the equality constraint enforced by (13), Jc(qt)u⋆t = 0, give an integrated step whose equality residual is O(∆t2) + O(εtol) = O(∆t2). Under the rank

and pseudoinverse bounds, the retraction displacement is of

the same order. At termination of the active-set iteration, the

actuated

input

satisfies

every

CBF

half-space,

∇h¯ i (qt )T

u⋆
t

≥

−γih¯i(qt). A Taylor expansion of h¯i along the step, with the

tolerance term and the retraction displacement absorbed into κi, then gives (16). With γi∆t ≤ 1 and h¯i(qt) ≥ 0, the right
side is at least −κi∆t2.

The bound makes the layer {q : h¯i(q) ≥ −(κi/γi)∆t} forward invariant, since −(κi/γi)∆t is a fixed point of the

5

TABLE II JOINT-LIMIT VIOLATIONS, MEASURED CONSTRAINT RESIDUALS, AND MPPI-INNER COMPUTATION TIMES OVER THE 0–6 s INTERVAL.

Method

Chain trans. (m)

Chain rot. (rad)

Tilt (rad)

Max. bound viol. (rad)

Max. margin pen. (rad)

DQ-MPPI [17] PR-MPPI Fulla

0.004±0.000 0.003±0.000

0.004±0.001 0.003±0.000

0.061±0.047 0.002±0.000

0.082 0.000

PR-MPPI w/o retraction PR-MPPI w/o inequalitya

0.007±0.002 0.003±0.000

0.008±0.003 0.003±0.000

0.011±0.004 0.002±0.000

0.000 0.022

a The returned command satisfies every equality channel to below 10−9 throughout. The table entries are measured-state residuals.

0.132 0.003 < 0.001 0.072

Compute time (ms)
238.948±19.473 19.351±1.216 18.288±0.514 8.975±0.092

recursion (16). A safety buffer hsafe,i ≥ (κi/γi)∆t with h¯i(q0) ≥ 0 therefore keeps hi(qt) ≥ 0 at every cycle. If the per-step parameter γ¯i = γi∆t ∈ (0, 1] is held fixed, the invariant-layer width is (κi/γ¯i)∆t2, recovering the O(∆t2)
finite-step layer.

III. EXPERIMENTS

A. Experimental Setup

In this section, we present three experiments designed to

evaluate the proposed method. Experiment 1 examines the

multi-inequality projection when an aggressive joint-tracking

objective activates multiple joint-limit margins simultaneously,

and assesses the respective roles of inequality projection and

equality retraction. Experiment 2 investigates how incorporat-

ing inequality projection into the sampled dynamics affects the

generation of near-feasible rollout trajectories in a randomized

obstacle-avoidance task; and Experiment 3 evaluates hardware

applicability and reactive avoidance of a moving obstacle on a

humanoid robot. Experiments 1 and 2 use a dual-arm Franka

Emika Panda in MuJoCo [19], whereas Experiment 3 uses the

two 7-DoF arms of a Unitree H1-2 humanoid.

In every experiment, the arms rigidly grasp a tray with

both end-effectors, and the enforced equality constraint is the

resulting closed-chain condition



∨

log E(q)

c(q) =  φo  ∈ R8,

E(q) = Tl lTr Tr−1,

ϑo

(17)

where Tl, Tr ∈ SE(3) are the end-effector poses, lTr and

lTo are the grasp-fixed relative poses of the right gripper

and the tray, and (φo, ϑo) are the roll and pitch of the tray pose Tl lTo. The inequalities h(q) collect the joint-limit and

obstacle margins specified in each scenario. All experiments

run on an Intel Core i5-13400F CPU with 16 GB of RAM

and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4060 Ti GPU (8 GB VRAM).

PR-MPPI is configured identically in all experiments: K =

1000 rollouts over a horizon of T = 30 steps with ∆t = 1/30 s, and an isotropic exploration covariance Σu = σ2I

with σ = 0.03 rad/s on the commanded joint velocities,

and every inequality uses the class-K gain γi = 5. PR-

MPPI runs at 30 Hz, and its retracted joint command is

tracked by a computed-torque law at the 500 Hz state rate.

The task costs, their weights, and the detailed parameters

for each experiment are provided on the project page, https:

//rcilab.github.io/prmppi.

(a)
Margin
(b)
Fig. 2. Joint-limit stress test. (a) Dual-arm tray-lowering motion: the goal joint configuration in green and the trajectory executed by Full PR-MPPI in blue. (b) Measured fourth-joint trajectories of both arms for the four controllers. The dashed line is the artificial lower bound q4,min = −2.35 rad and the dotted line the shifted guard boundary at −2.30 rad; the shaded band between them is the 0.05 rad CBF margin.
B. Experiment 1: Joint-Limit Stress Test The system is initialized at a configuration corresponding
to a level tray at (0.45, 0, 1.0) m and tracks an IK solution for (0.45, 0, 0.55) m. Both arms start from q4 = −2.01 rad, whereas the IK target is q4,g = −2.41 rad. We impose the artificial lower bound q4,min = −2.35 rad and a 0.05 rad CBF safety margin, which shifts the guard boundary to −2.30 rad. Because the target lies 0.06 rad beyond the bound in both arms, the two joint-limit constraints become active nearly simultaneously.
We compare Full PR-MPPI with DQ-MPPI and two ablations: PR-MPPI without retraction, which bypasses the final equality retraction, and PR-MPPI without inequality projection, which disables joint-limit projection in both the sampled dynamics and the execution layer. In this experiment, the joint-tracking cost weight was set to ten times the joint-limit violation penalty weight. No joint-limit violation penalty was

6

applied to Full PR-MPPI or PR-MPPI without retraction.
Figure 2 and Table II summarize the outcome. Because the tracking objective aggressively drives both fourth joints toward the bound, a soft joint-limit penalty can be traded against a sufficiently aggressive task objective. A cost-based treatment alone therefore cannot guarantee the limit, and the measurements confirm it: PR-MPPI without inequality projection and DQ-MPPI penetrate the bound by 0.022 and 0.082 rad, respectively. Full PR-MPPI uses no joint-limit violation penalty and instead removes the bound-violating component from every sampled and executed velocity: both joints settle onto the guard boundary and slide along it, the bound is never crossed, and the residual 0.003 rad margin penetration is absorbed by the 0.05 rad safety shift. Lemma 1 characterizes the remaining finite-step command-space margin deviation as O(∆t2). The 0.05 rad safety shift is selected conservatively to absorb this deviation and tracking errors; the absence of a measured-state bound crossing remains an empirical result.
The measured equality residuals in Table II are similar across the controllers. The chain channels of all four methods remain at the 10−3 level because the two methods without retraction still take a null-space projection step at every cycle. DQ-MPPI uses its low-level null-space servo, whereas PRMPPI without retraction uses the execution-layer projection (13). The commanded control inputs, however, show that the retraction step is required for command-space equality satisfaction to numerical tolerance. The command of Full PRMPPI satisfies every channel of (17) to within (0.170±0.070)× 10−10 m in chain translation, (0.280 ± 0.020) × 10−10 rad in chain rotation, and (0.055 ± 0.052) × 10−10 rad in tilt. These values are the numerical floor of the projection and retraction pipeline, while the measured residuals reflect lowlevel tracking error. For PR-MPPI without retraction and DQMPPI, the commanded residuals coincide with the measured ones because finite-step drift from tangent-space integration remains in the command and cannot be removed by the lowlevel controller. DQ-MPPI additionally handles tray tilt only as a soft cost, resulting in a larger mean tilt residual (0.061 versus 0.002 rad).
As shown in Table II, the computational differences reflect the structure of each method. PR-MPPI applies the inequality projection at every step of every sampled rollout, so its cost increases with the number of inequality constraints, while the retraction is applied only once to the selected command and contributes little overhead. DQ-MPPI, evaluated with the authors’ official implementation1, performs two MPPI stages together with a clustering step. On the same hardware and at the same sampling budget, its planning update takes 238.948 ms against 19.351 ms for Full PR-MPPI. Both methods run their low-level null-space controller at 500 Hz between planning updates; the difference lies in the replanning rate, about 4.2 Hz for DQ-MPPI versus the sustained 30 Hz of PR-MPPI.

TABLE III OUTCOME COUNTS OVER 30 RANDOMIZED OBSTACLE PLACEMENTS.

Method
MC-MPPI [18] DQ-MPPI [17] PR-MPPI Full PR-MPPI Exec.-Only Ineq.

Success/ Total
13/30 18/30 30/30 29/30

Stuck
17 1 0 1

Tray

drop

Collision

0

0

11

0

0

0

0

0

Fig. 3. Randomized obstacle-avoidance task at the central lateral offset. The tray is transported past the spherical obstacle (red) under the closed-chain grasp; green marks the goal tray pose and blue a representative collision-free detour by Full PR-MPPI, with its dashed tray-center path.
C. Experiment 2: Randomized Obstacle Avoidance
The level tray moves from (0.5, 0, 0.5) m to (0.5, 0, 1.0) m past a spherical obstacle of radius 0.05 m centered at (xi, yi, 0.75) m, where xi and the lateral offset yi are drawn at random within [0.40, 0.60] m and [−0.10, 0.10] m, respectively, for each of the 30 paired trials and shared by all controllers, so that each must find a lateral detour around the blocked straight path in Fig. 3. All methods use task-space tracking. PR-MPPI takes h(q) as the tray–obstacle distance with safety margin hsafe = 0.02 m, whereas DQ-MPPI and MC-MPPI [18] rely on a soft collision cost alone. Full PRMPPI handles the obstacle through the projection only, with no collision penalty in its cost. An execution-only ablation of PR-MPPI disables the inequality projection inside the sampled dynamics while keeping the execution filtering and the retraction, and instead carries the same squared penetration penalty as the baselines; all other settings are identical.
All controllers run for 120 s against the same outcome geometry: a collision is declared when the tray contacts the obstacle sphere, which exerts no physical force, and a run succeeds when the tray pose error e = ∥ log(T −1Tg)∥2, which stacks the translational (m) and rotational (rad) components of the relative twist, stays below 0.02 2 for 1 s; failed runs are classified by their first failure event as collision, tray drop, or stuck.
Table III summarizes the outcomes, which separate primarily by how each method handles the obstacle inequality. MCMPPI completes 13 of 30 trials, while all 17 unsuccessful trials are classified as stuck: no collision or tray drop occurs, but the controller does not attain the goal dwell within the horizon. The stuck behavior is most evident when the obstacle lies
1Available at https://dq-gpu-mpc.github.io/. 2Matching the criterion of [17], which thresholds the dual-quaternion poseerror norm—approximately e/2 for small errors—at 0.01.

T = 0s

T = 1.5s

T = 3s

7
T = 4.5s

Fig. 4. Hardware demonstration on the Unitree H1-2. The two arms hold a tray carrying a payload under the closed-chain grasp while a hand-held obstacle is moved toward it; each frame is labelled with the elapsed time.

near the center of the nominal path, around (0.5, 0, 0.75) m. Because the tray is wide relative to the available clearance, a large fraction of the sampled trajectories then intersect the obstacle, leaving too few informative feasible samples that pass around either side. The cost-only update consequently fails to establish a consistent lateral detour, and the motion stalls near the obstacle.
DQ-MPPI employs a two-stage MPPI scheme whose first stage performs high-variance exploration. Under the common sampling budget, it also has the longer update time reported in Table II, so its closed-loop behavior reflects both the two-stage update and its attainable replanning rate. In the trials, DQMPPI produces more abrupt commanded motion and longer executed paths. On the same 18 placements where DQ-MPPI succeeds, its mean path length is 1.338 m, compared with 0.686 m for Full PR-MPPI. The larger step-to-step motion also magnifies the finite-step error of the first-order constraint correction, increasing the closed-chain residuals. Indeed, the traydrop trials exhibit larger mean chain translation, chain rotation, and tilt residuals than the successful trials: the respective values increase from 0.0111 m, 0.0105 rad, and 0.0239 rad to 0.0159 m, 0.0181 rad, and 0.0301 rad. The resulting loss of closed-chain consistency can degrade tray support; 11 of the 12 failures are tray drops, while the remaining failure is stuck.

D. Experiment 3: Reactive Avoidance of a Moving Obstacle on Hardware
The two 7-DoF arms of a Unitree H1-2 humanoid hold a loaded tray under the closed-chain grasp while a person advances a hand-held obstacle toward it from varying directions. The current obstacle position is supplied to the controller at each control cycle and held fixed over the rollout horizon, so the controller replans reactively without predicting obstacle motion. The same sampling–projection–retraction pipeline used in simulation is deployed online with only the platform’s kinematic model substituted. As shown in Fig. 4, the arms reshape their configuration within the equality tangent subspace to open clearance, while the retraction returns graspconsistent commands and the measured tray remains level. This experiment demonstrates online hardware deployment and reactive avoidance.
A limitation nevertheless emerged when the obstacle advanced along a direction whose clearance-increasing motion the closed-chain equality forbids. Near such configurations the projected gradient of the margin, N ∇h¯, nearly vanishes, and no admissible input can increase clearance without violating the grasp. The failure is therefore structural rather than an artifact of control rate or latency: it is the inherent price of satisfying the commanded equality to numerical tolerance, since the very projection that guarantees the grasp also excludes the retreating motion.

The execution-only ablation separates the two roles of the projection. With the execution filtering kept, the constraints themselves hold: whatever the update proposes, the actuated command is corrected on the states it visits, and no collision or tray drop occurs in any trial. The plan, however, is still evaluated on rollouts that violate the obstacle margin, and the cost of this appears in how the search behaves. When the obstacle blocks the center of the nominal path, few informative samples pass around either side, so the search takes longer or stalls. The ablation reaches the goal dwell in 18.217±10.183 s against 17.951 ± 5.046 s for Full PR-MPPI, with twice the spread, and the same effect appears as path variability: it travels 0.757 ± 0.107 m against 0.636 ± 0.040 m, with the largest detours at placements close to the nominal path. Its single failure, out of 30 trials, is stuck at exactly such a placement. Full PR-MPPI projects every sampled input inside the rollouts, so the trajectory cost is evaluated on motions that respect the margin and the update averages over rollouts that already pass the obstacle. It runs with the tray–obstacle penalty disabled entirely and completes every trial.

IV. CONCLUSION
We presented Projection-Retraction MPPI, a samplingbased MPC that enforces equality and inequality constraints inside its rollouts through one nested velocity-space projection, with a retraction that satisfies the commanded equality to numerical tolerance independently of the task weighting. On a 14-DoF dual-arm system, the returned commands reached this tolerance while the measured trajectories retained the true inequality margins under aggressive task costs. The same pipeline was deployed on the arms of a Unitree H12 humanoid for reactive avoidance of a moving obstacle. Approaches whose retreat direction the closed chain forbids exposed the structural cost of command-space equality enforcement.
The proposed formulation operates at the kinematic level: the projection and retraction act on configurations and velocities, and a low-level controller tracks the retracted command. The structure itself, however, is not tied to this choice. Sampled torques can equally be projected onto the dynamically consistent tangent space of the same constraint manifold, with

8
torque limits and contact-force margins entering as inequalities of the same nested form, which would place the exactness guarantee at the actuation layer. This torque-level extension, together with the selective relaxation of the grasp equality when the admissible tangent motion is insufficient, is left to future work.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou, “Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control,” in 2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2016, pp. 1433–1440.
[2] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357, 2017.
[3] M. Bhardwaj, B. Sundaralingam, A. Mousavian, N. D. Ratliff, D. Fox, F. Ramos, and B. Boots, “Storm: An integrated framework for fast jointspace model-predictive control for reactive manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 750–759.
[4] J. Yin, P. Tsiotras, and K. Berntorp, “Chance-constrained informationtheoretic stochastic model predictive control with safety shielding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Decision and Control (CDC), 2024, pp. 653–658.
[5] J. Yin, C. Dawson, C. Fan, and P. Tsiotras, “Shield model predictive path integral: A computationally efficient robust MPC method using control barrier functions,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 7106–7113, 2023.
[6] F. Rastgar, H. Masnavi, B. Sharma, A. Aabloo, J. Swevers, and A. K. Singh, “PRIEST: Projection guided sampling-based optimization for autonomous navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08235, 2023.
[7] G. Zhao, N. Jin, J. Wu, and Z. Xiong, “Online motion generation via tangential sampling-based MPC around nonconvex obstacles,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 5537–5544, 2025.
[8] L. Park, K. Jang, and S. Kim, “CSC-MPPI: A novel constrained MPPI framework with DBSCAN for reliable obstacle avoidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16386, 2025.
[9] E. M. Andrejev, A. Manoharan, K.-E. Unt, and A. K. Singh, “π-MPPI: A projection-based model predictive path integral scheme for smooth optimal control of fixed-wing aerial vehicles,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, 2025.
[10] Y. Nakamura and H. Hanafusa, “Inverse kinematic solutions with singularity robustness for robot manipulator control,” J. Dyn. Syst. Meas. Control, vol. 108, no. 3, pp. 163–171, 1986.
[11] B. Siciliano and J.-J. E. Slotine, “A general framework for managing multiple tasks in highly redundant robotic systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robot. (ICAR), 1991, pp. 1211–1216.
[12] T. F. Chan and R. V. Dubey, “A weighted least-norm solution based scheme for avoiding joint limits for redundant joint manipulators,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 286–292, 1995.
[13] B. Dariush, Y. Zhu, A. Arumbakkam, and K. Fujimura, “Constrained closed loop inverse kinematics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), 2010, pp. 2499–2506.
[14] D. Berenson, S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, and J. J. Kuffner, “Manipulation planning on constraint manifolds,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), 2009, pp. 625–632.
[15] L. Jaillet and J. M. Porta, “Path planning under kinematic constraints by rapidly exploring manifolds,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 105–117, 2013.
[16] Z. Kingston, M. Moll, and L. E. Kavraki, “Exploring implicit spaces for constrained sampling-based planning,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 38, no. 10–11, pp. 1151–1178, 2019.
[17] T. Zhu, J. Mao, J. Yang, and S. Li, “Real-time dual-arm cooperative manipulation under multiple constraints: A two-stage sampling MPC approach,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2026.
[18] S. Lee and S. Kim, “Manifold-constrained model predictive path integral control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.24813, 2026.
[19] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for modelbased control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033.

