Learning Sampling Distributions for Model Predictive Control

Jacob Sacks University of Washington jsacks6@cs.washington.edu

Byron Boots University of Washington bboots@cs.washington.edu

arXiv:2212.02587v1 [cs.RO] 5 Dec 2022

Abstract: Sampling-based methods have become a cornerstone of contemporary approaches to Model Predictive Control (MPC), as they make no restrictions on the differentiability of the dynamics or cost function and are straightforward to parallelize. However, their efﬁcacy is highly dependent on the quality of the sampling distribution itself, which is often assumed to be simple, like a Gaussian. This restriction can result in samples which are far from optimal, leading to poor performance. Recent work has explored improving the performance of MPC by sampling in a learned latent space of controls. However, these methods ultimately perform all MPC parameter updates and warm-starting between time steps in the control space. This requires us to rely on a number of heuristics for generating samples and updating the distribution and may lead to sub-optimal performance. Instead, we propose to carry out all operations in the latent space, allowing us to take full advantage of the learned distribution. Speciﬁcally, we frame the learning problem as bi-level optimization and show how to train the controller with backpropagationthrough-time. By using a normalizing ﬂow parameterization of the distribution, we can leverage its tractable density to avoid requiring differentiability of the dynamics and cost function. Finally, we evaluate the proposed approach on simulated robotics tasks and demonstrate its ability to surpass the performance of prior methods and scale better with a reduced number of samples.
Keywords: Model Predictive Control, Normalizing Flows
1 Introduction
Sequential decision making under uncertainty is a fundamental problem in machine learning and robotics. Recently, model predictive control (MPC) has emerged as a powerful paradigm to tackle such problems on real-world robotic systems. In particular, MPC has been successfully applied to helicopter aerobatics [1], robot manipulation [2, 3, 4], humanoid robot locomotion [5], robotassisted dressing [6], and aggressive off-road driving [7, 8, 9]. Sampling-based approaches to MPC are becoming particularly popular due to their simplicity and ability to handle non-differentiable dynamics and cost functions. These methods work by sampling controls from a policy distribution and rolling out an approximate system model using the sampled control sequences. They then use the resulting trajectories to compute an approximate gradient of the cost function and update the policy. Next, the controller samples an action from this distribution and applies it to the system. It repeats the process from the resulting next state, creating a feedback controller. Between time steps, it warm-starts the optimization process using a modiﬁcation of the solution at the previous time step.
An important design decision is the form of the sampling distribution, which is often simple, e.g. a Gaussian, such that we can efﬁciently sample and tractably update its parameters. However, this also has drawbacks: without much control over the distribution form, samples often lie in high-cost regions, hindering performance. This can be particularly problematic in complex environments with sparse costs or rewards, as a poorly parameterized distribution may hinder efﬁcient exploration, leading the system into bad local optima. A side effect is that we often require many samples to accomplish the objective, increasing computational requirements. There have been extensions which target more complex distributions, such as Gaussian mixture models [10] and a particle method based on Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [11]. However, there is a large amount of structure in the environment that these methods fail to exploit. Instead, an alternative approach is to learn a sampling distribution which can leverage the environmental structure to draw more optimal samples.
Prior work on learning MPC sampling distributions generally requires differentiability of the dynamics and cost function [12, 13]. Power and Berenson [14, 15] circumvent this issue by leveraging

normalizing ﬂows (NFs) [16, 17, 18], which have a tractable log-likelihood. This property allows them to learn ﬂexible distributions by directly optimizing the MPC cost without requiring differentiability via the likelihood-ratio gradient. However, a limitation of their approach is that all online updates to the distribution and warm-starting between time steps occur entirely in the control space, leaving the latent distribution ﬁxed. This forces them to apply heuristics to generate samples by combining those from the learned distribution with Gaussian perturbations to the current control-space mean. These restrictions prevent us from fully taking advantage of the learned distribution and potentially throws away useful information. Additionally, their approach does not allow for the incorporation of control constraints directly into the sampling distribution, which is important for real-world robots.
Instead, we propose to alter the optimization machinery to operate entirely in the latent space. As the NF latent space follows a simple distribution, it remains feasible to perform MPC updates in this learned space and update the latent distribution online. Speciﬁcally, during an episode, the parameters of the latent distribution are updated with MPC while those of the NF remain ﬁxed. Then during training, after each episode, the parameters of the NF are updated. We can frame this setup as a bi-level optimization problem [19] and derive a method for computing an approximate gradient through the latent MPC update. This involves treating MPC as a recurrent network, where the control distribution acts as a form of memory, and unrolling the computation to train with backpropagationthrough-time (BPTT). However, it is no longer clear how to warm-start between time steps because there is no clear delineation of time in the latent space. Moreover, the usual method of warm-starting, which simply shifts the current plan forward in time, may be sub-optimal. Therefore, we propose to learn a shift model, which performs all warm-starting operations in the latent space. Finally, we show how to alter the NF architecture to incorporate box constraints on the sampled controls.
Contributions: In this work, we build upon recent efforts to learn sampling distributions for MPC with NFs by moving all online parameter updates and warm-start operations into the latent space. We accomplish this by framing the learning problem as bi-level optimization and derive an approximate gradient through the MPC update of the latent distribution to train the network with BPTT. Additionally, we show how to parameterize the ﬂow architecture such that we can incorporate box constraints on the controls. Finally, we empirically evaluate our proposed approach on simulated navigation and manipulation tasks. We demonstrate its ability to improve performance over the baselines by taking full advantage of the learned latent space. We ﬁnd that the performance of the controllers with our learned sampling distributions scales more gracefully with a reduction in the number of samples.

2 Sampling-Based Model Predictive Control

We consider the problem of controlling a discrete-time stochastic dynamical system, which is in state xt ∈ RN at time step t. Upon the application of control ut ∈ RM , the system incurs the instantaneous cost c(xt, ut) and transitions to xt+1 ∼ f (xt, ut). We wish to design a policy ut ∼ π(·|xt) such that the system achieves good performance over T steps. Instead of ﬁnding a single, globally optimal
policy, MPC re-optimizes a local policy at each time step by predicting the system’s behavior over a ﬁnite horizon H < T using an approximate model fˆ. Speciﬁcally, in sampling-based MPC, we
sample a control sequence uˆt ∼ πθ(·), where uˆt (uˆt, uˆt+1, · · · , uˆt+H−1), and our policy is parameterized by θ ∈ Θ. We rollout our model starting at xt using these sampled controls to get our
predicted state sequence xˆt (xˆt, xˆt+1, · · · , xˆt+H ), with xˆt = xt. The total trajectory cost is

H −1

C(xˆt, uˆt) = c(xˆt+h, uˆt+h) + cterm(xˆt+H ),

(1)

h=0

where cterm(·) is a terminal cost function. We then construct a statistic Jˆ(θ; xt) deﬁned on cost C(xˆt, uˆt) and use the rollouts to solve θt ← arg minθ∈Θ Jˆ(θ; xt). After optimizing our parameters, we sample the control sequence uˆt ∼ πθt (·), apply the ﬁrst control to the real system (i.e. ut = uˆt), and repeat the process. Because each parameter θt depends on the current state, MPC effectively yields a state-feedback policy, even though the individual distributions give us an open-loop sequence.
In this paper, we consider a popular sampling-based MPC algorithm known as Model Predictive Path Integral (MPPI) control [7, 8]. MPPI optimizes the exponential utility or risk-seeking objective:

Jˆ(θ; xt) = − log Eπθ,fˆ exp − 1β C(xˆt, uˆt) , (2)

2

where β > 0 is a scaling parameter, known as the temperature. As we do not assume that the dynamics or cost function are differentiable, we compute the gradients via the likelihood-ratio derivative:

Eπθ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)∇θ log πθ(uˆt)

∇Jˆ(θ; xt) = −

1

.

(3)

− β C(xˆt,uˆt)

Eπθ,fˆ e

In MPPI, the policy is assumed to be a factorized Gaussian of the form

H −1

H −1

πθ(uˆ) = πθh (uˆt+h) = N (uˆt+h; µt+h, Σt+h).

(4)

h=0

h=0

Previous work by Wagener et al. [9] has shown that optimizing this objective with dynamic mirror descent (DMD) [20] and approximating with Monte Carlo estimates gives us the MPPI update rule:

N (i)

e− β1 C(xˆt(i),uˆt(i))

µt+h = (1 − γt)µ˜t+h + γt wiuˆt+h, wi = N − β1 C(xˆt(j),uˆt(j)) (5)

i=1

j=1 e

where µ˜t+h is the current mean for each time step and γt is the step size. Between time steps of DMD, we get µ˜t+h from our previous solution µt+h by using a shift model µ˜t+h = Φ(µt+h). This shift model aims to predict the optimal decision at the next time step given the previous solution. In the context of MPC, it allows us to warm-start the optimization problem to speed up convergence, as we can only approximately solve the optimization problem due to real-time constraints.

3 Learning the Sampling Distribution of MPC

3.1 Representation of the Learned Distribution
Instead of using uninformed sampling distributions, learned distributions can potentially exploit structure in the environment to draw samples which are more likely to be collision-free and close to optimal. However, such learned distributions must be sufﬁciently expressive in order to better capture near-optimal, potentially multimodal, behavior. They must also be parameterized such that it is tractable to sample from and update online. If the distribution has a large number of parameters, the number of samples required to efﬁciently update them online may be computationally infeasible. And ideally, the form of our distribution would be such that we could ﬁnd a closed-form update.
One path towards meeting these criteria is to maintain a simple latent distribution from which we can sample, and then learn a transformation of the samples which maps them to a more complex distribution. During training, we learn the parameters of this transformation, which can be conditioned on problem-speciﬁc information, such as the starting and goal conﬁgurations of the robot and obstacle placements. However, when executing the policy during an episode, the parameters of this learned transformation remain ﬁxed, and instead, we update the parameters of the latent distribution. Concretely, we consider learning a distribution πθ,λ which is deﬁned implicitly as follows:

zˆt ∼ pθ(·), uˆt = hλ(zˆt; c)

(6)

where zˆt (zˆt, zˆt+1, · · · , zˆt+H−1), c is a context variable describing the relevant information of the environment, pθ is the latent distribution with parameters θ, and hλ is the learned conditional transformation with parameters λ. Moving forward, we assume that both zˆt and uˆt are stacked as vectors in RMH . If pθ is a Gaussian factorized as in Equation (4) and we assume that hλ is invertible, we prove in Appendix A.6 that the corresponding DMD update to the latent mean is simply
Equation (5), except that we replace the controls in the weighted sum with the latent samples.

3.2 Formulating the Learning Problem
Learning the distribution πθ,λ amounts to solving a bi-level optimization problem [19], in which one optimization problem is nested in another. The lower-level optimization problem involves updating the latent distribution parameters at each time step, θt, by minimizing the expected cost with DMD. The upper-level optimization problem consists of learning λ such that MPC performs well across a number of different environments. To formalize this, ﬁrst consider that we have some distribution of

3

environments c ∼ C(·) over which we wish MPC to perform well. For each environment, our system has some conditional initial state distribution x0 ∼ ρ(·|c). The objective we wish to minimize is then

T −1

(θ, λ; c) = Eπθ,λ,ρ,f

Jˆ(θt, λ; xt, c)

(7)

t=0

where θ = (θ0, θ1, · · · , θT −1) and our cost statistic, Jˆ, now depends on λ and c as well. This objective measures the expected performance of the intermediate plans produced by MPC along the T steps of the episode. Our desired bi-level optimization problem can be formulated as:

min EC (θ(λ), λ; c) s.t. θ(λ) ≈λ arg min (θ, λ; c)

(8)

λ

θ

where ≈λ indicates that we approximate the solution of the optimization problem with an iterative algorithm that may also be parameterized by λ, as the exact minimizer is not available in closed form. Moreover, the notation θ(λ) indicates the dependence of the lower-level solution on the upper-level parameters. In our case, we solve the lower-level problem with DMD, where we also parameterize the shift model, Φλ(·; c), making it a learnable component and conditioned on c.

The normal shift model in MPC simply shifts the control sequence forward one time step and appends a zero or random control at the end. However, because we are performing this update in the latent space, there is no clear delineation between time steps of the latent controls, as they are coupled according to the learned transformation. Therefore, there is no way to easily perform the equivalent shift operation in the latent space. As such, we instead learn this shift model along with the transformation. Besides, the standard approach described above may not be optimal. By learning it, we may be able to further improve performance. This is especially true because the performance hinges greatly on the quality of the shift model since we only run one iteration of the DMD update.

3.3 Parameterizing with Normalizing Flows

In order to optimize the upper-level objective in Equation (8) with respect to λ, we need to be able to compute the density πθ,λ directly. Therefore, we choose to represent hλ with a normalizing ﬂow (NF) [16, 18, 17], which explicitly learns the density by deﬁning an invertible transformation that maps
latent variables to observed data. Generally, we compose a series of component ﬂows together, i.e. hλ = hλK ◦ hλK−1 ◦ · · · ◦ hλ1 , which deﬁne a series of intermediate variables yˆ0, . . . , yˆK−1, yˆK , with yˆ0 = zˆ and yˆK = uˆ. The log-likelihood of the composed ﬂow is given by:

K ∂yˆi

log πθ,λ(uˆ|c) = log pθ(zˆ) − log det

.

(9)

i=1 ∂yˆi−1

In this work, we make use of the afﬁne coupling layer proposed by Dinh et al. [18] as part of the real non-volume-preserving (RealNVP) ﬂow. The core idea is to split the input uˆ into two partitions uˆ = (uˆI1 , uˆI2 ), where I1 and I2 are a partition of [1, M H], and apply

yˆI1 = uˆI1 , yˆI2 = uˆI2 exp sλ(uˆI1 , c) + tλ(uˆI1 , c),

(10)

where sλ and tλ are the scale and translation terms, which are represented with arbitrary neural networks, and is the Hadamard product. This makes computing the log-determinant term in Equation (9) and inverting the ﬂow fast and efﬁcient. Now, in robotics, we often have lower and upper limits on the controls. These are usually enforced in sampling-based MPC by either clamping the control samples or passing them through a scaled sigmoid. However, instead of enforcing the constraints heuristically after sampling, we learn a constrained sampling distribution directly. Since the sigmoid function is invertible and has a tractable log-determinant (shown in Appendix A.8), we can simply append one after hλK in the NF and scale it by the control limits. This ensures that control constraints are satisﬁed by design and taken into account while learning the distribution.

3.4 Training the Sampling Distribution

Computing gradients through the upper-level objective is not straightforward, as both the expectation and the inner terms of Equation (7) depend on λ. Therefore, the state distribution depends on the NF and latent shift model. One way around this issue is to consider a modiﬁed objective at each batch d:

T −1

d(θ, λ; c) = Eπθ,λd ,ρ,f

Jˆ(θt, λ; xt, c) ,

(11)

t=0

4

which ﬁxes the outer expectation to be with respect to the current policy. Intuitively, this choice trains the NF to optimize the MPC cost function under the state distribution resulting from the current policy πθ,λd . This effectively ignores the dependency of the action chosen to interact with the true environment and the learned parameters. We then update the outer expectation distribution at each episode, overcoming the covariate shift problem that would otherwise arise.

Now, we only have to focus on computing the gradient ∇λJˆ(θt(λ), λ; xt, c)|λ=λd for each time step, which can be computed similar to Equation (3) and approximated with Monte Carlo sampling:

N

ˆ

(i)

∇J (θt(λ), λ; xt, c) ≈ − wi∇λ log πθt(λ),λ(uˆt |c),

(12)

i=1

where the weights wi are deﬁned according to Equation (5). The log-likelihood is given by Equation (9), the gradient of which involves computing the backwards pass through the network hλ. However, we also have to consider the dependence of the latent distribution parameters θ(λ) on λ.
Therefore, we must backpropagate through the MPC update:

µt(λ) = (1 − γt)µ˜t(λ) + γt∆µt,

Eπ ˜

,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)hλ(uˆt; c)

∆µt = 1 θt(λ),λ

Eπ ˜

,fˆ e− β C(xˆt,uˆt)

θt (λ),λ

(13)

where the previous shifted mean µ˜t(λ) is given by the learned latent shift model. Note that we have

rewritten the expectations in terms of the control distribution, rather than the latent distribution. This

is necessary in order to derive the following approximate gradient without requiring differentiability.

To compute the gradient of Equation (13), we must approximate the gradient of ∆µt with respect to

λ, which we can compute as

∂∆µt ∂λ

≈

M1

− M2M3, where we deﬁne:

N

M1 = wi ∇λhλ(uˆt(i); c) + hλ(uˆt(i); c)∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c) ,

i=1 (14)

N

N

M2 = wihλ(uˆt(i); c), M3 = wi∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c).

i=1

i=1

The derivation of this approximate gradient can be found in Appendix A.7. Note that computing the gradients ∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c) will also require us to backpropagate through the shift model due to the dependence of θ˜ on λ. Therefore, even when the step size is set to one, i.e. γt = 1, we introduce a form of recurrence between time steps. Please see Appendix A.1 for additional visualizations of the
computational graph generated by an episode and further descriptions of the overall algorithm.

4 Related Work

There have been many recent attempts at combining machine learning with MPC, which mostly center around learning or ﬁne-tuning a good dynamics model [6, 8, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25], potentially from high-dimensional observations [3, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31]. Alternatively, some methods target the cost function, learning terminal value functions [32, 33, 34, 35, 36] or cost-shaping terms [37] to improve performance with reduced prediction horizons. Instead of learning dynamics and cost separately, other methods propose learning the entire optimal controller [12, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 37] or planner [43, 44, 45, 46] end-to-end. In contrast, recent work has explored leaving the dynamics and cost function ﬁxed and instead focused on improving the optimization process. For example, Sacks and Boots [47] propose to use learning to replace the update rule employed to solve the optimization problem at each time step with a neural network. They showed that this can substantially reduce the number of samples required to achieve a target task performance with sampling-based MPC.
Using alternative sampling distributions is another viable strategy for improving the optimization process in MPC. Multiple works have considered sampling distributions beyond simple Gaussians, such as Gaussian mixture models [10] and a particle method based on Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) [11]. Additionally, most implementations use heuristics to modify samples and squeeze out additional performance gains [4, 48]. In terms of learning the distribution, Amos and Yarats [12] learn a latent action space for their proposed differentiable cross-entropy method (CEM) controller. However, they require all components of the pipeline to be differentiable and do not

5

consider learning a shift model. Agarwal et al. [13] learn a normalizing ﬂow in the latent space of a variational autoencoder (VAE). Yet, they also require differentiability, use expert demonstrations to learn the latent space of the VAE, and have no means of warm-starting between time steps. Wang and Ba [49] propose to use a learned feedback policy to warm-start MPC, but still rely on a Gaussian perturbations to the proposed action sequence. The authors also explore performing online planning in the network’s parameter space, which results in a massive action space that may be hard to scale.
Power and Berenson [14, 15] also train a normalizing ﬂow to use as the sampling distribution for MPC, but they do not learn a latent shift model and perform all operations in the control space. Moreover, they mix the latent samples with Gaussian perturbations to the current control-space mean, as they do not update the latent distribution directly. This prevents them from fully taking advantage of the learned distribution and throws away useful information which could potentially improve performance. In fact, we show in Appendix A.4 that the learned shift model contributes signiﬁcantly to the performance gains. Additionally, a primary focus of their work is on how to handle out-of-distribution (OOD) environments by learning a posterior over environment context variables. We could combine their approach with ours by conditioning the learned shift model on the inferred environment context for improved generalization. Finally, normalizing ﬂows have also been used to improve exploration in RL [50, 51, 52] by providing a more ﬂexible, and potentially multimodal, distribution. They have also been employed in sampling-based motion planning [53, 54] to provide good proposal conﬁgurations to speed up convergence.
5 Experimental Results
In all experiments, we denote our proposed approach as NFMPC, the baseline MPPI implementation as MPPI, and the method by Power and Berenson [14, 15] as FlowMPPI. Details about the hyperparameters, implementation, tasks, and training can be found in Appendix A.2. We evaluate on a ﬁxed set of environments, which includes start states, goal locations, and obstacle placements, and run 32 rollouts for each sample amount. Our primary metrics for comparison are the success rate, deﬁned as the percentage of times the task goal was achieved, and the average cost of trajectories which successfully completed the task. Additionally, we cannot ignore the overhead introduced by the NF in the control pipeline. Therefore, we measured the average change in wall clock time across different amounts of samples for NFMPC and FlowMPPI in Appendix A.5.
5.1 Planar Robot Navigation
We begin by applying NFMPC to a planar robot navigation task in which a 2D holonomic point-robot must reach a goal position while avoiding eight dynamic obstacles, which move around randomly at each time step (PNRANDDYN). The point-robot has double integrator dynamics with stochasticity on the acceleration commands to create a mismatch between the predictive model used by MPC and the true environment. Each obstacle’s current position is perturbed with Gaussian noise and clipped to be within map bounds, and the starting and goal locations of the robot are randomized in each episode. The NF for both NFMPC and FlowMPPI is conditioned on the obstacle locations, current state, and goal position. Note that we do not condition the shift model, as this consistently hurt performance.
We quantitatively compare all controllers in Figure 1. The trajectory cost box plots represent the median and quartiles of the distribution. We ﬁnd that NFMPC consistently outperforms the both MPPI and FlowMPPI. While all controllers reach a 100% success rate at 1024 samples, NFMPC achieves a 20% and 8% lower median cost over MPPI and FlowMPPI, respectively. We also ﬁnd that NFMPC scales more gracefully overall as the number of samples is reduced. For instance, it is able to withstand a 32× decrease in the number of samples (1024 to 32) while reducing success rate by only 3% and increasing median cost by 8%, nearly matching FlowMPPI at 1024 samples. In comparison, MPPI reduces success rate by 6% and increases median cost by 43%. Similarly, NFMPC outperforms FlowMPPI at all sample amounts in terms of median cost, although at 16 samples FlowMPPI achieves a slightly higher success rate than NFMPC. We visualize trajectories and top samples in Figure 2. The green and red dots are the starting and goal locations, respectively, and the blue dot is the current position of the robot at the given time step. The thick black line is the resulting path taken by the controller, while the gray lines are the top samples generated at the current state. In this example, FlowMPPI nearly collides with an obstacle, while NFMPC and MPPI are able to safely reach the goal. FlowMPPI over commits to a narrow corridor and is unable to reroute in time to account for the new obstacle location. NFMPC takes a similar trajectory to FlowMPPI, however, it is able to pause until the obstacle moves out of the way to proceed towards the goal.
6

MPPI

FlowMPPI

NFMPC

100 45

40 80
35

Total Cost

Success Rate

60

30

25 40
20

20 15 10

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 1: Success rate and cost distribution on the PNRANDDYN environment across a different number of samples.

MPPI FlowMPPI NFMPC

Figure 2: Visualization of a trajectory and top samples from (top) NFMPC, (middle) FlowMPPI, and (bottom) MPPI on the PNRANDDYN task.
We also provide additional experiments with static environments and comparing unconditional and conditional models in Appendix A.3.
5.2 Franka Panda Arm
Next, we apply NFMPC to the FRANKA task, which involves controlling a 7 degree-of-freedom (DOF) Franka Panda robot arm and steering it towards a randomly placed target goal from a ﬁxed starting pose while avoiding a single pole obstacle. The NF for both NFMPC and FlowMPPI is conditioned on the obstacle locations, initial state, and goal position. It is also important to note that no controller achieves a 100% success rate, as not every randomly generated environment is feasible. As shown in Figure 3, at 1024 samples, NFMPC achieves a success rate of 84%, while FlowMPPI and MPPI only succeed 81% and 78% of the time, respectively. Again, NFMPC scales better with a reduced number of samples. With a 64× decrease in the number of samples (1024 to 16), NFMPC only drops in success rate by 29%. Meanwhile, FlowMPPI decreases by nearly 70% to a success rate of 25%. However, both fair better than MPPI, which drops by 80% to a success rate of 16%. These results support the hypothesis that learning to perform MPC updates in the latent space of the NF and training the controller as a recurrent network improves performance.
To more clearly understand what NFMPC is doing differently, we visualize the performance of all three controllers on a held-out validation environment in Figure 4. The green and red markers indicate the end-effector and goal positions, respectively, while the single pole is the obstacle which must be avoided. Additionally, the green trajectories represent the top samples from the controller at each time step. While MPPI collides with the obstacle, both NFMPC and FlowMPPI learn to take a different
7

MPPI

FlowMPPI

NFMPC

107 80

70

Total Cost

Success Rate

60 106
50

40

30 105 20

10

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 3: Success rate and cost distribution on the FRANKAOBSTACLES environment across a different number of samples.

MPPI FlowMPPI NFMPC

Figure 4: Visualization of a trajectory and top samples from (top) NFMPC, (middle) FlowMPPI, and (bottom) MPPI on the FRANKAOBSTACLES task.
path which is collision-free. FlowMPPI generates better initial trajectories than NFMPC, which are more pointed towards the goal location and achieve a greater velocity. However, NFMPC is able to better adapt the sampling distribution throughout the episode and reach the goal more quickly. Finally, in Appendix A.4, we present results for the environment with no obstacles, a comparison of conditional and unconditional models, and a breakdown of the individual cost terms for all models to gain insight into the learned sampling distributions. We also perform an ablation which removes the learned shift model from NFMPC to illustrate that it is a crucial component.
6 Limitations
A major limitation of NFMPC is that the learned distribution and shift model are only valid for a ﬁxed horizon and control dimensionality. Therefore, these components cannot be directly transferred to new robots or for alternate horizons without being retrained. However, this could potentially be remedied by novel architectural innovations and training distributions across both environments and robots. Moreover, the learned distribution is speciﬁc to the environmental distributions on which it was trained. Therefore, it does not always perform as well when transferred to out-of-distribution environments. However, this is always going to be a challenge for any learning-based method and addressing it is an open problem for future research. For instance, our approach could be combined with the method developed by Power and Berenson [14, 15], which learned a generative model of environments and used this learned distribution to perform a projection step on the conditional NF. However, this approach would only be valid for conditional models, and addressing transfer of unconditional models is an unresolved question. Finally, both our approach and FlowMPPI introduce
8

an additional overhead to due to running the NF which cannot be ignored. This increase in wall clock time may be worth the additional performance gains. Additionally, we scale better with a reduction in samples compared to all baselines. Therefore, we can potentially alleviate some of the introduced overhead by reducing the number of samples while still meeting the application demands.
7 Conclusion
We presented a method for learning MPC sampling distributions with normalizing ﬂows (NFs) which moves all online parameter updates and warm-starting operations into the latent space. We show how to frame the problem as bi-level optimization and derive an approximate gradient through the MPC update to train the distributions. Additionally, we illustrate how to incorporate control box constraints directly into the NF architecture. Through our empirical evaluations in both simulated navigation and manipulation problems, we demonstrate that our approach is able to surpass the performance of all baselines. Moreover, we ﬁnd that controllers which move all operations into the latent space are often able to scale more gracefully with a reduction in the number of samples. These results indicate the importance of leveraging the latent space in learned sampling distributions for MPC. Finally, because we learn all components of the controller through episodic interactions with the environment, they can potentially be trained to account for the modeling errors in the MPC controller.
References
[1] P. Abbeel, A. Coates, and A. Y. Ng. Autonomous Helicopter Aerobatics through Apprenticeship Learning. The International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), 29(13):1608–1639, 2010.
[2] V. Kumar, E. Todorov, and S. Levine. Optimal Control with Learned Local Models: Application to Dexterous Manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 378–383. IEEE, 2016.
[3] C. Finn and S. Levine. Deep Visual Foresight for Planning Robot Motion. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 2786–2793. IEEE, 2017.
[4] M. Bhardwaj, B. Sundaralingam, A. Mousavian, N. Ratliff, D. Fox, F. Ramos, and B. Boots. STORM: An Integrated Framework for Fast Joint-Space Model-Predictive Control for Reactive Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13542, 2021.
[5] T. Erez, K. Lowrey, Y. Tassa, V. Kumar, S. Kolev, and E. Todorov. An integrated system for real-time Model Predictive Control of humanoid robots. In IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pages 292–299. IEEE, 2013.
[6] Z. Erickson, H. M. Clever, G. Turk, C. K. Liu, and C. C. Kemp. Deep Haptic Model Predictive Control for Robot-Assisted Dressing. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4437–4444. IEEE, 2018.
[7] G. Williams, P. Drews, B. Goldfain, J. M. Rehg, and E. A. Theodorou. Aggressive driving with model predictive path integral control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 1433–1440. IEEE, 2016.
[8] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M. Rehg, B. Boots, and E. A. Theodorou. Information theoretic MPC for model-based reinforcement learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 1714–1721. IEEE, 2017.
[9] N. Wagener, C.-A. Cheng, J. Sacks, and B. Boots. An Online Learning Approach to Model Predictive Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08967, 2019.
[10] M. Okada and T. Taniguchi. Variational Inference MPC for Bayesian Model-based Reinforcement Learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), pages 258–272. PMLR, 2020.
[11] A. Lambert, A. Fishman, D. Fox, B. Boots, and F. Ramos. Stein Variational Model Predictive Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07641, 2020.
[12] B. Amos and D. Yarats. The Differentiable Cross-Entropy Method. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 291–302. PMLR, 2020.
9

[13] S. Agarwal, H. Sikchi, C. Gulino, and E. Wilkinson. Imitative Planning using Conditional Normalizing Flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.16162, 2020.
[14] T. Power and D. Berenson. Variational Inference MPC for Robot Motion with Normalizing Flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Workshop on Robot Learning: Self-Supervised and Lifelong Learning, 2021.
[15] T. Power and D. Berenson. Variational Inference MPC using Normalizing Flows and Out-ofDistribution Projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04667, 2022.
[16] L. Dinh, D. Krueger, and Y. Bengio. Nice: Non-linear Independent Components Estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
[17] D. Rezende and S. Mohamed. Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
[18] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio. Density estimation using Real NVP. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.
[19] J. F. Bard. Practical Bilevel Optimization: Algorithms and Applications, volume 30. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[20] E. Hall and R. Willett. Dynamical Models and Tracking Regret in Online Convex Programming. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 579–587. PMLR, 2013.
[21] I. Lenz, R. A. Knepper, and A. Saxena. DeepMPC: Learning Deep Latent Features for Model Predictive Control. In Robotics: Science and Systems (R:SS). Rome, Italy, 2015.
[22] J. Kocijan, R. Murray-Smith, C. E. Rasmussen, and A. Girard. Gaussian process model based predictive control. In American Control Conference (ACC), volume 3, pages 2214–2219. IEEE, 2004.
[23] J. Fu, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel. One-Shot Learning of Manipulation Skills with Online Dynamics Adaptation and Neural Network Priors. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 4019–4026. IEEE, 2016.
[24] K. Chua, R. Calandra, R. McAllister, and S. Levine. Deep Reinforcement Learning in a Handful of Trials using Probabilistic Dynamics Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12114, 2018.
[25] A. Nagabandi, G. Kahn, R. S. Fearing, and S. Levine. Neural Network Dynamics for ModelBased Deep Reinforcement Learning with Model-Free Fine-Tuning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 7559–7566. IEEE, 2018.
[26] N. Wahlstro¨m, T. B. Scho¨n, and M. P. Deisenroth. From Pixels to Torques: Policy Learning with Deep Dynamical Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02251, 2015.
[27] M. Watter, J. T. Springenberg, J. Boedecker, and M. Riedmiller. Embed to Control: A Locally Linear Latent Dynamics Model for Control from Raw Images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.07365, 2015.
[28] E. Banijamali, R. Shu, H. Bui, and A. Ghodsi. Robust Locally-Linear Controllable Embedding. In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pages 1751– 1759. PMLR, 2018.
[29] F. Ebert, C. Finn, S. Dasari, A. Xie, A. Lee, and S. Levine. Visual Foresight: Model-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Vision-Based Robotic Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018.
[30] J.-S. Ha, Y.-J. Park, H.-J. Chae, S.-S. Park, and H.-L. Choi. Adaptive Path-Integral Autoencoder: Representation Learning and Planning for Dynamical Systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
[31] D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, I. Fischer, R. Villegas, D. Ha, H. Lee, and J. Davidson. Learning Latent Dynamics for Planning from Pixels. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019.
10

[32] M. Zhong, M. Johnson, Y. Tassa, T. Erez, and E. Todorov. Value Function Approximation and Model Predictive Control. In IEEE Symposium on Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning (ADPRL), pages 100–107. IEEE, 2013.
[33] U. Rosolia and F. Borrelli. Learning Model Predictive Control for Iterative Tasks. A Data-Driven Control Framework. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 63(7):1883–1896, 2017.
[34] K. Lowrey, A. Rajeswaran, S. Kakade, E. Todorov, and I. Mordatch. Plan Online, Learn Ofﬂine: Efﬁcient Learning and Exploration via Model-Based Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01848, 2018.
[35] M. Bhardwaj, S. Choudhury, and B. Boots. Blending MPC & Value Function Approximation for Efﬁcient Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05909, 2020.
[36] M. Bhardwaj, A. Handa, D. Fox, and B. Boots. Information Theoretic Model Predictive Q-Learning. In Learning for Dynamics & Control (L4DC), pages 840–850. PMLR, 2020.
[37] A. Tamar, G. Thomas, T. Zhang, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel. Learning from the Hindsight Plan — Episodic MPC Improvement. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 336–343. IEEE, 2017.
[38] P. Karkus, D. Hsu, and W. S. Lee. QMDP-Net: Deep Learning for Planning under Partial Observability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.06692, 2017.
[39] M. Okada, L. Rigazio, and T. Aoshima. Path Integral Networks: End-to-End Differentiable Optimal Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.09597, 2017.
[40] B. Amos, I. D. J. Rodriguez, J. Sacks, B. Boots, and J. Z. Kolter. Differentiable MPC for End-to-end Planning and Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.13400, 2018.
[41] M. Okada and T. Taniguchi. Acceleration of Gradient-based Path Integral Method for Efﬁcient Optimal and Inverse Optimal Control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3013–3020. IEEE, 2018.
[42] M. Pereira, D. D. Fan, G. N. An, and E. Theodorou. MPC-Inspired Neural Network Policies for Sequential Decision Making. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05803, 2018.
[43] A. Tamar, Y. Wu, G. Thomas, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel. Value Iteration Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02867, 2016.
[44] A. Srinivas, A. Jabri, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Universal Planning Networks: Learning Generalizable Representations for Visuomotor Control. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 4732–4741. PMLR, 2018.
[45] T. Yu, G. Shevchuk, D. Sadigh, and C. Finn. Unsupervised Visuomotor Control through Distributional Planning Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05542, 2019.
[46] M. Bhardwaj, B. Boots, and M. Mukadam. Differentiable Gaussian Process Motion Planning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 10598–10604. IEEE, 2020.
[47] J. Sacks and B. Boots. Learning to Optimize in Model Predictive Control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 10549–10556. IEEE, 2022.
[48] C. Pinneri, S. Sawant, S. Blaes, J. Achterhold, J. Stueckler, M. Rolinek, and G. Martius. Sampleefﬁcient Cross-Entropy Method for Real-time Planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06389, 2020.
[49] T. Wang and J. Ba. Exploring Model-Based Planning with Policy Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08649, 2019.
[50] Y. Tang and S. Agrawal. Boosting Trust Region Policy Optimization by Normalizing Flows Policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10326, 2018.
11

[51] Y. Tang and S. Agrawal. Implicit Policy for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.06798, 2018.
[52] B. Mazoure, T. Doan, A. Durand, J. Pineau, and R. D. Hjelm. Leveraging exploration in off-policy algorithms via normalizing ﬂows. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), pages 430–444. PMLR, 2020.
[53] T. Lai and F. Ramos. Learning to Plan Optimally with Flow-based Motion Planner. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11323, 2020.
[54] T. Lai, W. Zhi, T. Hermans, and F. Ramos. Parallelised Diffeomorphic Sampling-based Motion Planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11775, 2021.
[55] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 32:8026– 8037, 2019.
[56] J. H. Halton. Algorithm 247: Radical-inverse quasi-random point sequence. Communications of the ACM, 7(12):701–702, 1964.
[57] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin, A. Allshire, A. Handa, et al. Isaac Gym: High Performance GPU-Based Physics Simulation For Robot Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470, 2021.
[58] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. Layer Normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
[59] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
12

Table 1: Controller Hyperparameters Environment

Parameter

PNGRID PNRAND FRANKA

Horizon (H) Temperature (β)

32 10−32

64 10−32

32 10−4

MPPI

Init. cov. (σ2)

10

100

0.1

Step size (γ)

0.7

1

1

Spline knots (n)

None

None

4

Init. cov. (σ2)

10

10

0.1

FlowMPPI

Latent cov.

1

1

0.1

Latent mean penalty (λ) 10−4

10−3

1

NFMPC

Latent cov.

1

1

0.1

A Appendix

A.1 Computational Graph Visualization

We visualize the computational graph of a sin-

Env

gle episode in Figure 5. The normalizing ﬂow

Env ...

(NF), shift operator (Shift), and loss computation (Loss) are colored blue, indicating that they

Shift

...

are differentiable modules. The MPPI update

MPPI

MPPI

(MPPI) is colored in purple, to indicate that we

are approximating the gradient as above, which

NF

NF

can be implemented as a custom backwards pass

in autodifferentiation software. All of the paths

of the graph through which the gradients ﬂow

Sim

Sim

during the backwards pass are colored in purple.

The simulator (Sim), colored in green, is solely

Loss

Loss

...

used to compute the weights for the MPPI up-

date, which are reused in the backwards pass. At each time step, the updated mean µt deﬁnes

Differentiable module

Approximate backward pass

Environment

Simulator

Non-differentiable Differentiable

a latent Gaussian, which is used to generate controls applied to the actual environment (Env), denoted by the yellow box. Note that both the latent variables and controls are being passed to the MPPI module. This is because during the forward pass, we can simply take the weighted

Figure 5: Computational graph of an episode which illustrates the interaction between the normalizing ﬂow (NF), learned latent shift model (Shift), the MPPI update (MPPI) of the latent mean, the simulator (Sim), and the environment (Env).

sum of latent variables. However, during the backward pass, we have to re-run the network with the

controls to compute the approximate gradients, as discussed in Section 3.4.

A.2 Experimental Details
Controller Details. We use a modiﬁed version of the MPPI implementation by Bhardwaj et al. [4], which is implemented in PyTorch [55]. For the MPPI baseline, we perform covariance adaptation of the full covariance matrix across the horizon and control dimensions. The initial covariance matrix is always an identity matrix scaled by an initial covariance scalar hyperparameter σ2. Additionally, this implementation uses Halton sequences [56] for generating control sequence samples and smooths the sampled trajectories with n-degree B-splines in some tasks. When B-splines are used, we sample the Halton sequence once at the beginning of a rollout and then transform it using the mean and covariance of the Gaussian distribution. Additionally, we ensure that the mean of the Gaussian is always in the set of samples. All hyperparameters of the controllers were chosen via a grid search and the ﬁnal choices for each task are listed in Table 1. When it improves performance, we warm-start the controllers prior to the ﬁrst time step by running the MPC update for 100 iterations to ensure convergence. Additionally, we normalize the total trajectory costs prior to computing the softmax weights, as discused by Okada and Taniguchi [10].

13

In general, we use the same settings for NFMPC and FlowMPPI that were found in this grid search. However, we do not performance covariance adaptation on the latent Gaussian and assume the ﬂow learns how to adjust sample spread as needed. Additionally, we take the previous mean in the control space, shift it forward, and add it to the set of control samples at the next time steps. While the learned latent shift model handles this well in most cases, we found adding this sample sped up training and slightly improved performance. We always use Halton sequences to sample from the latent Gaussian, but never use B-splines. For FlowMPPI, we always use half the samples for sampling from the NF and half for the Gaussian perturbations on the current control-space mean. We do perform covariance adaptation on the perturbation Gaussian and re-tune its initial covariance. Finally, we have the additional λ parameter, which penalizes the latent Gaussian samples from deviating too much from the projection of the current control-space mean into the latent space.

Planar Robot Navigation. The planar navigation environment has a state space of xt ∈ R4, which consists of the robot’s 2D position, (px, py), and velocity, (vx, vy), and a control space of ut ∈ R2, which are the robot’s 2D acceleration commands. The robot has double-integrator dynamics with

additive Gaussian noise on the controls, as described by the following equations:

px

1 0 ∆t 0  px  0 0 

py 

0 1 0 ∆t py  0 0 

v  = 0 0 1 0  v  + ∆t 0  (ut + wt), wt ∼ N (0, σI), (15)

x

x

vy t+1 0 0 0 1 vy t

0 ∆t

where we set ∆t = 0.1 and σ = 1. Additionally, we added acceleration limits of u = −10 and u¯ = 10 for both directions. The cost function consists of the Euclidean distance to the goal, a signed-distance ﬁeld representation of the obstacles, and a term which encourages the robot to stay within the bounds of the map, and a quadratic control penalty:

c(x, u) = wgoal||x − xg||22 + wboundcbound(xt) + wcollSDF(px, py) + wctrl||u||22,

(16)

where we deﬁne the map bound cost as:

cbound(x) =

I[(pi > p¯i) || (pi < pi)] min (pi − p¯i)2, (pi − pi)2 .

(17)

i∈(x,y)

In the above equations, xg is the goal state, p¯i and pi are the upper and lower bounds of the map for each coordinate, and SDF(·, ·) indexes an image which represents the signed-distance ﬁeld. We mainly focus on the PNRANDDYN task, which involves steering the robot towards a goal position while avoiding eight dynamic obstacles. While the obstacles drift randomly in the environment with Gaussian steps, their positions are clipped to be within map bounds. We do not update their position if the perturbation would bring it too close to the robot or goal location to prevent collisions which the robot cannot react to in time to avoid. An episode lasts for 200 time steps and is considered successful if the agent reaches the goal without colliding into any obstacles. In Appendix A.3, we also consider a static version of this environment (PNRAND), which simply places the eight obstacles randomly in the environment, and a version which arranges the obstacles in a ﬁxed grid (PNGRID).

Franka Panda Arm. The Franka Panda arm environment deﬁnes the robot state in joint space with xt ∈ R21, consisting of each joint’s angle θi, angular velocity θ˙i, and angular acceleration θ¨i. Its control space is ut ∈ R7, which are the angular acceleration commands for each joint. The dynamics are deterministic and implemented by the Nvidia Isaac Gym simulator [57]. However, the MPC
controllers use a simpler kinematic model deﬁned by Bhardwaj et al. [4], which is implemented in a
batch fashion by leveraging its linearity:

Θ¨ = u, Θ˙ = Θ˙ t + Sl(1)diag(∆t)Θ¨ , Θ = Θt + Sl(1)diag(∆t)Θ˙ ,

(18)

where the bold symbols indicate that they consist of values along the entire horizon, Θ includes the angles for all joints, Sl(1) is a lower triangular matrix ﬁlled with 1, and ∆t is a vector of time steps across the horizon. We use smaller time steps earlier along the horizon and larger ones for later time
steps. By implementing the dynamics in batch, we avoid iteratively unrolling the dynamics, speeding up controller computation signiﬁcantly. For computing cost, we also require the Cartesian poses X, velocities X˙ , and accelerations X¨ of the end-effector. These are obtained via:

X = FK(Θ), X˙ = J(Θ)Θ˙ , X¨ = J˙(Θ)Θ˙ + J(Θ)Θ¨

(19)

14

where FK(Θ) are the forward kinematics and J(Θ) is the kinematic Jacobian. The cost function is a weighted sum of a number of terms, as deﬁned by Bhardwaj et al. [4], which includes: distance of end-effector to the goal pose cpose, a time varying velocity limit cost cstop that enables stopping within the speciﬁed horizon, a joint limit cost cjoint, a manipulability cost cmanip which encourages the arm to avoid singular conﬁgurations, a self-collision cost cself−coll, and a obstacle collision cost ccoll. The overall ﬁnal cost function is then:
c(x, u) = wpcpose(x) + wscstop(x) + wj cjoint(x) + wmcmanip(x) + wc(cself−coll(x) + ccoll(x)). (20)

The self-collision cost is implemented with a neural network that predicts the closest distance between the links of the robot given a conﬁguration. The collision cost is a binary cost which uses a learned collision checking function that operates directly on raw point cloud data and classiﬁes if a robot link is in collision. See Bhardwaj et al. [4] for further details about each of the individual cost terms. For the FRANKAOBSTACLES task, we control the 7 degree-of-freedom (DOF) Franka Panda robot arm and steer it towards a target goal from a ﬁxed starting pose while avoiding a single pole obstacle. The obstacle and goal positions are randomized at the beginning of each episode, which lasts for 600 time steps. An episode is considered successful if the end effector reaches the target position under the time constraints while avoiding the obstacle. In Appendix A.4, we also consider a simpliﬁed version which has no obstacles (FRANKA).

Architectural and Training Details. All NFs for both NFMPC and FlowMPPI were implemented in PyTorch and contain afﬁne coupling layers which use multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) for both the scale and translation terms. The scale and translation networks use Tanh and ReLU activations, respectively. We also employ layer normalization [58] in these networks to help prevent overﬁtting. Interestingly, we found that adding batch normalization between each layer, as proposed by Dinh et al. [18], actually hurt performance and was therefore excluded. In all environments, we use 5 RealNVP blocks for the NF, and each MLP has a hidden dimensionality of 128 neurons. For the PNGRID, FRANKA, and FRANKAOBSTACLES tasks, the shift model is also an MLP with a single hidden layer of 128 neurons and a ReLU activation function. In PNRAND and PNRANDDYN the shift model is implemented as an LSTM with a hidden dimensionality of 128 neurons. For a fair comparison, the same architecture was used for both FlowMPPI and NFMPC. We trained all networks with the Adam optimizer [59] using a learning rate of 10−4.

To train the NFMPC variants, we following the training procedure in Algorithm

Algorithm 1: Training Loop

1, which is carried out training over D episodes. In each episode d, we sample an environment from C and initial state from ρ.
We then perform our rollouts by sampling latent controls zˆt(1:N), passing them through the normalizing ﬂow to get controls uˆt(1:N), and then applying them to our approximate
dynamics model and cost function to get weights wt(1:N). These variables are used to update the latent distribution of the policy to θt. Next, we can either sample a control from the policy or use a control correspond-
ing to the latent mean. We apply this control
to the true system and shift the latent dis-
tribution parameters forward with the shift
model. Finally, we compute the loss for the
current time step, accumulate the loss to our running sum, and repeat for T time steps.

Input: Environment dist. C, initial state dist. ρ, initial param. θ˜0, λ0
Parameters: # episodes D, episode length T , #
samples N
for d = 1, 2, . . . , D do
Sample environment c ∼ C(·)
Sample initial state x0 ∼ ρ(·|c)
Initialize episode loss ld ← 0 for t = 0, 1, . . . , Tk − 1 do
(uˆt, zˆt, wt)(1:N) ← Rollout(xt, c, θ˜t, λd) Update θ˜t to θt using latent MPPI update Sample ut ∼ πθt,λd or ut ← hλd −1(µt; c) Apply control to system xt+1 ∼ f (xt, ut) Shift parameters θ˜t+1 ← Φλd (θt, c) Compute loss Jˆt(θt, λd; xt, c) Accumulate loss d ← d + Jˆt end
Update λd to λd+1 with ∇λ d using SGD end

Once the episode is complete, we update λd

using the gradient of the loss and carry on to the next episode. Every 100 environments, we test the

controller on 10 held out environments and save the current model if it outperforms the previous best

on this validation set. While this introduces a variable number of total episodes used to train the

models, we generally ﬁnd convergence between 2000 and 7000 episodes.

In contrast, to train FlowMPPI, we do not actually run an episode. Instead, we generate the environment and take a gradient step on the initial distribution of the ﬂow conditioned on the

15

MPPI

FlowMPPI

NFMPC

100 1012

80

1010

Success Rate Total Cost

60 108

106 40
104
20 102

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 6: Success rate and cost distribution on the PNGRID task across a different number of samples.

NFMPC

FlowMPPI

MPPI

Figure 7: Visualization of trajectories in the PNGRID task across multiple random seeds for a ﬁxed environmental layout.

environmental information. We train FlowMPPI over 10000 randomly generated environments for each task. We achieved the best performance by initializing the ﬂow with the FlowMPPI solution, and then reﬁning the ﬂow and learning the shift model jointly as above. When we condition the NF on additional information, this is simply appended to the current input of each shift and translation network directly. This conditional information includes start and goal locations for PNGRID and FRANKA and start, goal, and obstacle locations for PNRAND and FRANKAOBSTACLES. For PNRANDDYN we use the current state instead of the initial location, which was found to improve performance for all controllers. For the obstacles, the conditional information is the Cartesian coordinates of each object of interest stacked together in a vector.

A.3 Additional Planar Navigation Experiments

PNGRID. We consider a variant of the planar navigation task that involves static obstacles arranged in a grid (PNGRID), described in Appendix A.2. All other task details are the same as in the PNRANDDYN task, except that we use an unconditional NFMPC controller. We quantitatively compare all controllers in Figure 6 and ﬁnd that NFMPC consistently matches or outperforms both MPPI and FlowMPPI at each sample quantity in terms of both success rate and average trajectory cost of successful trajectories. We also ﬁnd that NFMPC scales more gracefully than MPPI as the number of samples is reduced. In fact, we found that while FlowMPPI improves over MPPI at higher sample counts, it actually performs signiﬁcantly worse with fewer samples. This is in contrast to the results on more complex environments considered in the main paper, in which FlowMPPI generally outperforms MPPI at lower sample counts as well. This is potentially because in the standard implementation of FlowMPPI, half of the samples come from the NF and the other half

16

MPPI FlowMPPI NFMPC

Figure 8: Visualization of a trajectory and top samples from (top) NFMPC, (middle) FlowMPPI, and (bottom) MPPI on the PNGRID task.
are Gaussian perturbations of the current control-space mean. Initially, the samples coming from the NF provide a good initialization for the control distribution mean. However, as the latent Gaussian distribution used by the NF is never updated, half of our samples are always coming from this same distribution. When the environment or task is more complex, the conditioning information provided to the NF is enough to transform the samples in a useful way. However, in this simple environment, our hypothesis is that as the robot moves in the environment, these samples may cease to be as useful or informative. We then have to rely on the other half of samples coming from Gaussian perturbations of the control-space mean to do most of the work. As such, we effectively have half the budget of samples to work with than MPPI would, as the samples from the NF potentially do not provide much useful information. Meanwhile, because NFMPC is trained recurrently and updates are performed in the latent space, it can better exploit structure in the environment to transform samples.
To better understand what NFMPC is doing differently, we superimpose 32 different trajectories with ﬁxed start and goal positions using each controller in Figure 7. We ﬁnd that both MPPI and FlowMPPI always select the same path through the environment. Meanwhile, NFMPC is able to discover different paths through the environment, allowing it to better react to the stochastic perturbations that knock it off the current plan and improve performance. Additionally, we visualize the resulting trajectories and top samples drawn from the distributions for all controllers on one of the validation environments in Figure 8. As we would expect, the initial trajectory from FlowMPPI is better than those of the other two controllers, which basically lay in straight lines in front of the robot. However, NFMPC is able to discover a slightly faster route to the goal as it proceeds in the environment. The baseline MPPI controller takes a similar, but slightly longer, route to the goal. Additionally, it takes a longer time to ramp up its velocity compared to the other two controllers, contributing to its sub-optimal performance.
PNRAND. Next, we consider a variant of PNRANDDYN in which the eight obstacles are static (PNRAND). We consider the case where we condition the NF on obstacle locations, initial state, and goal position. However, it is important to note that we do not condition the shift model, as we found this consistently hurt performance. In Figure 9, we display the quantitative results and ﬁnd that NFMPC performed about on par with FlowMPPI, which outperformed MPPI. Unlike on the PNGRID task, both NFMPC and FlowMPPI scale similarly with a reduction of samples and better than MPPI. This can be partly attributed to the fact that the obstacles are more spaced out and there are more ”holes” in the environment than in the grid. Therefore, it is easier to avoid collisions, possibly contributing to the higher success rates when the controller has access to fewer samples. Moreover, conditioning on the obstacle locations provides the NF more information, which can be exploited without updating the latent distribution.
We again visualize the trajectories and top samples for all controllers on a validation environment in Figure 10. First, we note that the samples in FlowMPPI appear to be better spread around in the environment to search for good paths towards the goal. Meanwhile, NFMPC seems to have all top samples directed in one direction. All models seem to ﬁnd the same path, with MPPI oscillating more near the goal and reaching the goal more slowly than NFMPC and FlowMPPI. The similar performance of NFMPC and FlowMPPI can be partially attributed to the fact that all we may really need to succeed in this environment is a good initial trajectory which steers us
17

MPPI

FlowMPPI

NFMPC

100 40

80

35

30
60 25

Total Cost

Success Rate

40

20

15 20
10

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 9: Success rate and cost distribution on the PNRAND environment across a different number of samples.

MPPI FlowMPPI NFMPC

Figure 10: Visualization of a trajectory and top samples from (top) NFMPC, (middle) FlowMPPI, and (bottom) MPPI on the PNRAND task.
towards the goal. Whether we reﬁne this trajectory with a learned latent shift model or with Gaussian perturbations in the control space does not appear to make much difference in performance. However, in PNRANDDYN, we demonstrated that there is a signiﬁcant advantage to our approach, indicating that dynamic environments may be a good application for NFMPC.
Finally, in order to evaluate the beneﬁt of conditioning the NF, we compare the performance of NFMPC with and without conditioning the ﬂow on PNRAND in Figure 11. We ﬁnd that the conditional model consistently outperforms the unconditional model in terms of median cost, with the gap growing at reduced sample counts. This may be because the dynamics in PNRAND are rather simple, and there may not be much general structure for the unconditional model to exploit since the obstacle locations are entirely random. Therefore, while the unconditional model does fairly well, conditioning the ﬂow, and not the shift model, seems to enable further gains, even in this simple task.
PNRANDDYN. In addition to the experiments in the main paper, we also performed additional ablation studies. Speciﬁcally, we also considered training an unconditional model, as we did before in the PNRAND task. Moreover, we explored transferring controllers trained in the PNRAND task to this dynamic version of the environment. We plot the quantitative results from these ablation studies in Figure 12. Again, we ﬁnd that conditional models consistently outperform unconditional ones, with the gap in performance more pronounced. Not only is there a reduction in median cost for unconditional controllers, but it sometimes fails in environments in which its conditional counterpart succeeds. Transferring the models trained in PNRAND works surprisingly well at 1024 samples. However, at lower sample counts, there is a more pronounced difference in the transferred controllers
18

NFMPC (Uncond)

NFMPC (Cond)

100 25.0

22.5 80
20.0

60

17.5

Total Cost

Success Rate

15.0 40
12.5

20

10.0

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

7.5

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 11: Comparison of unconditional and conditional models on the PNRAND environment across a different number of samples.

NFMPC (Uncond, No Obs)

NFMPC (Cond, No Obs)

NFMPC (Uncond)

NFMPC (Cond)

100

50

80

40

Total Cost

Success Rate

60 30

40 20

20 10

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 12: Comparison of unconditional and conditional models on the PNRANDDYN environment across a different number of samples when trained in an environment with no obstacles (PNRAND) and retrained with obstacles present.

to those speciﬁcally trained in the dynamic environment. Therefore, it appears that controllers are more efﬁcient at exploring the environments they are trained on, and unsurprisingly, using more samples can partially overcome this gap.
A.4 Additional Franka Experiments
FRANKA. We consider a variant of the FRANKAOBSTACLES task which involves no obstacles, just a target goal, which we call FRANKA. We plot our quantitative results in Figure 13 and ﬁnd that NFMPC again consistently matches or outperforms MPPI and FlowMPPI at each sample amount. In fact, NFMPC always achieves a 100% success rate at all sample counts, while both MPPI and FlowMPPI signiﬁcantly drop in performance at lower amounts of samples. Moreover, FlowMPPI sometimes actually performed worse than MPPI, indicating that conditioning on just goal location does not help as much in this more complex scenario.
FRANKAOBSTACLES. In addition to the results in the main paper, we perform an additional ablation study in which we again compare an unconditional and conditional model on the FRANKAOBSTACLES environment in Figure 14. We also show the performance of transferring the unconditional

19

MPPI

FlowMPPI

NFMPC

100

80 106
60

Success Rate Total Cost

40 105
20

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 13: Success rate and cost distribution on the FRANKA environment across a different number of samples.

NFMPC (Uncond, No Obs)

NFMPC (Uncond, Retrained)

NFMPC (Cond)

80 106
70

60

Success Rate Total Cost

50

40 105
30

20

10

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 14: Comparison of an unconditional model trained with and without obstacles to a conditional model in the FRANKAOBSTACLES environment across a different number of samples.

model trained on the FRANKA environment without obstacles to an environment which contains the single pole obstacle. At 1024 samples, the conditional model performs the best in terms of success rate. Surprisingly, the unconditional model trained without obstacles performs best in terms of median cost and scales better to fewer samples. Therefore, while the conditional model more often ﬁnds a feasible path to the goal, the unconditional model is better able to exploit structure across environments to ﬁnd lower cost trajectories. One possible explanation is that because the unconditional model is trained without knowing the speciﬁc obstacle locations, it has to be more robust to variation in the environment. This also shows that transferring the learned distribution to novel environments is possible. However, since we only have a single static obstacle, it is not clear if these ﬁndings would generalize to more complex environments.
Breakdown of Trajectory Cost. We would like to better understand how the learned controllers improve upon the baseline on the FRANKAOBSTACLES task. As discussed in Appendix A.2, the cost function for the Franka tasks is composed of multiple terms. By inspecting the averages for each term, we hope to gain insight into the learned sampling distributions. Brieﬂy, we consider a manipulability cost (Manip), which encourages the arm to avoid singular conﬁgurations, a self-collision cost (Self), an obstacle collision cost (Obstacle), and a distance-to-goal cost (Goal).

20

NFMPC

NFMPC (No Shift)

NFMPC (No Shift, Retrained)

100

80

Success Rate Total Cost

60 105
40

20

0 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024
Num. Samples

16

32

64 128 256 512 1024

Num. Samples

Figure 16: Success rate and cost distribution on the FRANKA task with (NFMPC) and without (NFMPC (No Shift) and NFMPC (No Shift, Retrained) the learned shift model.

The cost breakdown for these terms in shown

in Figure 15. The baseline MPPI controller

achieves the lowest manipulability cost. Since

this term is not weighted as highly, it makes

sense that training the normalizing ﬂow would

focus on minimizing terms which were more

heavily weighted. Meanwhile, FlowMPPI

achieves the lowest self-collision cost, which

may be due to the fact that it starts off with a

better initial plan. However, NFMPC trained

with obstacles (NFMPC (Obs)) achieves the

lowest obstacle collision and distance-to-goal

cost. One possible explanation for this improve-

ment is that, because we train NFMPC with

BPTT, we are potentially able to account for

errors which arise due to the inaccurate model. Additionally, learning the shift model may be an important component to this improvement, which we explore below. Finally, we note that

Figure 15: Breakdown of different cost terms for each controller executing the FRANKAOBSTACLES task.

NFMPC (Obs) is better than NFMPC trained without obstacles (NFMPC (No Obs)) in all cost

terms except the manipulability cost, as it is in distribution for the task.

Shift Model Ablation. One of our main contributions which sets us apart from prior work is that we learn a latent shift model and train the controller as a recurrent network. To determine the impact of this choice, we consider an alternate scenario where the control sequence is instead shifted in control space. That is, we shift the mean in control space, as in the baseline MPPI controller, and then run the ﬂow backwards to infer the corresponding latent mean, which is used to bootstrap the next iteration. We consider two cases: 1) taking a pre-trained controller and removing the shift model (NFMPC (No Shift)) and 2) retraining the controller entirely from scratch without the shift model (NFMPC (No Shift, Retrained)). In Figure 16, we show the results of this ablation study on the FRANKA task. Removing the shift model strictly hurts performance, even when we retrain the normalizing ﬂow from scratch. Moreover, retraining the ﬂow actually results in worse performance than simply removing the shift model from the pre-trained controller. This implies that training the entire controller with BPTT allows it to discover lower-cost trajectories to the goal.

A.5 Performance Overhead of Normalizing Flow
We measured the average change in wall clock time across different amounts of samples for NFMPC and FlowMPPI compared to the baseline MPPI implementation on our NVIDIA Titan V GPU. For

21

the Planar Robot Navigation and Franka Panda Arm experiments, the average change is 1.61× and 1.91×, respectively. Moreover, compared to MPPI with 1024 samples, the change in wall clock time for NFMPC and FlowMPPI with 16 samples is approximately 1.01× and 1.14×, respectively. Therefore, the introduction of the normalizing ﬂow (NF) has a notable impact on wall clock time for both methods. However, this overhead is expected and does not prohibit either method’s utility in the real world. And there are still clear performance advantages of NFMPC over the baselines in terms of success rate and average trajectory cost for a given sample amount.
Furthermore, the performance of MPPI reported in the paper and the above timing comparisons are when the optimization is run for a single iteration per time step. However, the performance of MPPI generally improves with an increased number of iterations at the cost of an increased runtime. For instance, we compare the performance of MPPI run for 3 iterations per time step with NFMPC run for a single iteration, both using 1024 samples. In the FRANKA task, we can reduce the average trajectory cost of MPPI to be only 12% worse than NFMPC, rather than the previous 19%. When we introduce obstacles for the FRANKAOBSTACLEStask, MPPI with 3 iterations can actually match the success rate of NFMPC, albeit with a worse average trajectory cost. However, in this case, NFMPC actually results in an average reduction of wall clock time by 24.8%. Similarly, for the PNGRID task, MPPI with 3 iterations reduces the average trajectory cost to be only 10% worse than NFMPC, rather than the previous 40%. However, this again comes at the cost of increased runtime, as NFMPC reduces the average wall clock time by 26.8%. Therefore, NFMPC allows us to surpass the performance of MPPI run with more iterations while reducing the required runtime.
Additionally, NFMPC has substantial runtime beneﬁts over FlowMPPI due to its improved scaling. For the PNGRIDtask, NFMPC with 128 samples outperforms FlowMPPI with 1024 samples while reducing average runtime by 22%. Similarly, for the FRANKAtask, NFMPC with 64 samples outperforms FlowMPPI with 1024 samples while reducing average runtime by 43%. And for both Franka tasks (FRANKA and FRANKAOBSTACLES), NFMPC with 16 samples outperforms FlowMPPI with 128 samples while reducing average runtime by 8%. As such, there are clear runtime beneﬁts for NFMPC over both FlowMPPI and MPPI run for additional iterations. Finally, it is also important to note that we did not perform a hyperparameter sweep on the NF, and it may be possible to signiﬁcantly reduce the size of the network while retaining performance beneﬁts.

A.6 Proof for DMD Update of Latent Parameters

Theorem A.1. Consider the optimization problem

θt = arg min γtgt, θ + DKL(πθ,λ||πθ˜t,λ)

(21)

θ∈Θ

where we deﬁne πθ,λ(uˆ|c) = pθ(hλ(uˆ; c)) det ∂hλ (22) ∂uˆ
and hλ is an invertible, deterministic transformation, pθ a Gaussian factorized as in Equation (4), and θ is the natural parameters of the Gaussian. Then the corresponding update to the mean of the
latent Gaussian is given by:

Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)hλ(uˆt; c)

µ

µ θ,λ

µt = (1−γt )µ˜t+γt

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,uˆt

)

Eπθ˜,λ,fˆ e

Ep˜,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,h− λ 1(zˆt;c))zˆt

µ

µθ

= (1−γt )µ˜t+γt

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,hλ−1

(zˆt

;c))

Epθ˜,fˆ e

(23)

Proof. First, we note that

Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)∇θ˜ log πθ˜,λ(uˆt)

ˆ˜

θ,λ

gt = ∇J (θ; xt) = −

− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt) ,

Eπθ˜,λ,fˆ e

(24)

and that log πθ˜,λ(uˆ|c) = log pθ˜(hλ(uˆ; c)) + log det ∂hλ . (25) ∂uˆ
Therefore, when computing the gradient of Equation (25) with respect to θ˜, we can drop the logdeterminant term as it does not depend on θ˜. As such, we are left with the gradient of the latent

22

Gaussian with respect to its natural parameters, or ∇θ˜ log πθ˜,λ(uˆ|c) = ∇θ˜ log pθ˜(hλ(uˆ; c)). Taking this gradient of the log-likelihood term with respect to the natural parameters, we have:

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,uˆt

)

˜

Eπθ˜,λ,fˆ e

φ(hλ(uˆt; c)) − φt

gt = −

− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt) ,

Eπθ˜,λ,fˆ e

(26)

where φ˜t is the expectation parameter corresponding to natural parameter θ˜t and φ(·) is the sufﬁcient statistics of the latent distribution. We can rewrite the expectations in terms of pθ˜(·):

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,hλ−1

(zˆt

;c)))

˜

Epθ˜,fˆ e

φ(zˆt) − φt

gt = −

− β1 C(xˆt,hλ−1(zˆt;c)) ,

Epθ˜,fˆ e

(27)

Next, looking at the KL divergence term, we can write:

DKL(πθ,λ||πθ˜t,λ) = Eπθ,λ

log πθ,λ(uˆ) πθ˜t,λ(uˆ)

pθ(hλ(uˆ; c)) det ∂uˆ ∂hλ = Eπθ,λ log pθ˜(hλ(uˆ; c)) det ∂hλ (28)
∂uˆ

= Epθ log pθ(zˆ) pθ˜(zˆ)
= DKL(pθ||pθ˜t ), Then, using Proposition 1 from Wagener et al. [9], we can write the update rule as

Ep˜,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,h− λ 1(zˆt;c)))φ(zˆt)

˜

θ

φt = (1 − γt)φt + γt

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,hλ−1

(zˆt

;c))

Epθ˜,fˆ e

(29)

And when the sufﬁcient statistic is φ(zˆt) = (zˆt, zˆtzˆtT ), then we arrive at the usual MPPI update for the mean, but now deﬁned in terms of the latent samples:

Ep˜,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,h− λ 1(zˆt;c))zˆt

µ

µθ

µt = (1 − γt )µ˜t + γt

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,hλ−1

(zˆt

;c))

Epθ˜,fˆ e

which we can equivalently rewrite in terms of πθ˜,λ as:

(30)

Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)hλ(uˆt; c)

µ

µ θ,λ

µt = (1 − γt )µ˜t + γt

−

1 β

C

(xˆt

,uˆt

)

Eπθ˜,λ,fˆ e

(31)

A.7 Proof of Approximate Gradient Through MPPI Update

Theorem A.2. Let the MPPI update of the latent mean be given by

µt(λ) = (1 − γtµ)µ˜t(λ) + γtµ∆µt,

Eπ ˜

,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)hλ(uˆt; c)

∆µt = 1 θt(λ),λ .

Eπ ˜

,fˆ e− β C(xˆt,uˆt)

θt (λ),λ

(32)

Then the gradient of ∆µt with respect to λ can be approximated as

∂∆µt ≈ M1 − M2M3 (33) ∂λ

23

where
N

M1 = wi ∇λhλ(uˆt(i); c) + hλ(uˆt(i); c)∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c) ,

i=1 (34)

N

N

M2 = wihλ(uˆt(i); c), M3 = wi∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c).

i=1

i=1

Proof. First, we rewrite ∆µt = D(λ) N(λ) , where

N (λ) = Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)hλ(uˆt; c)
θt (λ),λ
Then by the quotient rule of calculus, we have

D(λ) = Eπ˜

,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt) .

θt (λ),λ

(35)

∂∆µt = ∇λN (λ) − N (λ) ∇λD(λ) . (36)

∂λ

D(λ) D(λ) D(λ)

We can compute each of these individual terms using the likelihood ratio gradients

∇λN (λ) = Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt) ∇λhλ(uˆt; c) + hλ(uˆt; c)∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c)
θt (λ),λ

(37)

∇λD(λ) = Eπ˜ ,fˆ e− β1 C(xˆt,uˆt)∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt(i)|c)
θt (λ),λ

(38)

Since each of the terms that make up our gradient in Equation (36) are divided by D(λ), when we

approximate them with Monte Carlo sampling, we can actually write them in terms of the same

weights used by MPPI in the forward pass:

∇λN (λ) (i) (i) (i) N

= D(λ)

wi ∇λhλ(uˆt ; c) + hλ(uˆt ; c)∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt |c)

i=1

N (λ) (i) N

= D(λ)

wihλ(uˆt ; c) = M2

i=1

∇λD(λ) (i) N

= D(λ)

wi∇λ log πθ˜(λ),λ(uˆt |c) = M3

i=1

= M1

(39a) (39b) (39c)

A.8 Sigmoid Flow Layer

We wish to use a sigmoid layer in our normalizing ﬂow to constrain our control sample uˆ such that each control along the horizon is between u and u¯. Since the sigmoid function is invertible, if we append a sigmoid layer at the end of our ﬂow, we have that

uˆ = wσ(yˆK−1) + b ⇐⇒ yˆK−1 = σ−1 uˆ − b = log uˆ − b , (40)

w

w − uˆ + b

where w = u¯ − u and b = u, the sigmoid and logit functions are applied element-wise, and the scaling and translation are broadcasted to each element of the vector uˆ. The derivative of the forward transformation is given by:

∂ wσ(x) + b = wσ(x)(1 − σ(x))
∂x

w

1

= 1 + e−x 1 − 1 + e−x (41)

w = (1 + e−x)(1 + ex) .

Since the sigmoid is applied element-wise, it has a diagonal Jacobian, the log-determinant of which is simply the sum of the log of its diagonal terms:

∂uˆ MH

−uˆi

uˆi

log det

= log(w) − log(1 + e ) − log(1 + e ),

(42)

∂yˆK−1 i=1

24

where we can implement the last two terms with the Softplus activation function. In the reverse direction, we have that:

∂ σ−1 x − b = 1 + 1 (43)

∂x

w

x−b w−x−b

Therefore, the log-determinant is given by:
∂yˆK−1 MH log det ∂uˆ = − log(uˆi − b) + log(w − uˆi − b) , (44)
i=1
As such, computing the inverse and the log-determinant terms of the Jacobian is efﬁcient and fast in both directions, adding minimal overhead to the ﬂow.

25

