Base Placement Optimization for Coverage Mobile Manipulation Tasks
Huiwen Zhang1,2 Kai Mi1 and Zhijun Zhang2

arXiv:2304.08246v1 [cs.RO] 17 Apr 2023

Abstract— Base placement optimization (BPO) is a fundamental capability for mobile manipulation and has been researched for decades. However, it is still very challenging for some reasons. First, compared with humans, current robots are extremely inﬂexible, and therefore have higher requirements on the accuracy of base placements (BPs). Second, the BP and task constraints are coupled with each other. The optimal BP depends on the task constraints, and in BP will affect task constraints in turn. More tricky is that some task constraints are ﬂexible and non-deterministic. Third, except for fulﬁlling tasks, some other performance metrics such as optimal energy consumption and minimal execution time need to be considered, which makes the BPO problem even more complicated. In this paper, a Scale-like disc (SLD) representation of the workspace is used to decouple task constraints and BPs. To evaluate reachability and return optimal working pose over SLDs, a reachability map (RM) is constructed ofﬂine. In order to optimize the objectives of coverage, manipulability, and time cost simultaneously, this paper formulates the BPO as a multiobjective optimization problem (MOOP). Among them, the time optimal objective is modeled as a traveling salesman problem (TSP), which is more in line with the actual situation. The evolutionary method is used to solve the MOOP. Besides, to ensure the validity and optimality of the solution, collision detection is performed on the candidate BPs, and solutions from BPO are further ﬁne-tuned according to the speciﬁc given task. Finally, the proposed method is used to solve a real-world toilet coverage cleaning task. Experiments show that the optimized BPs can signiﬁcantly improve the coverage and efﬁciency of the task.
I. INTRODUCTION
Planning a reasonable BP has a very important impact on the sequential task execution. For humans, this task can be accomplished very easily for two reasons. First, humans have very dexterous motor skills, so they have greater tolerance for base placement errors. Second, human beings have accumulated a lot of daily operation experience, which can make them easily predict a reasonable BP according to the task constraints. However, it is a non-trivial task for robots. This is because current robots are extremely inﬂexible compared with human beings. Although mobile manipulators have more degrees of freedom (DoFs), they are generally independently controlled. Therefore, the robot is very sensitive to BPs. On the other hand, the BP and task constraints are coupled together, and the optimal BPs depend on the task constraints, while task constraints are usually decided by the current BP. In addition, the robot is often
1Huiwen Zhang is with the Institute of CVTE Research and the School of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangdong, China. Kai Mi is with the Institute of CVTE Research huiwen@mail.ustc.edu.cn
2Zhijun Zhang is with the School of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China auzjzhang@scut.edu.cn

Fig. 1. BPO for the coverage cleaning task. The picture shows a reconstructed point cloud model of the toilet. To fulﬁll the washbasin and urinal cleaning task in a large range, the robot needs to stop at several optimized placements and ensures the overall coverage is maximal. Circles with green color represent the SLD model used to approximate the surface of washbasin. Axes arrays on the ground stand for the sampled candidate BPs.
expected to meet some other performance standard such as optimal energy and minimal running time, which makes the BPO problem even more complicated.
Coverage planning is a very important task for mobile manipulation [1], and a typical application is the cleaning task, such as table cleaning, garbage disposal [2]–[4] and steel bridge maintenance [5]. However, most works focus on coverage path planning, ignoring the importance of the BPO problem. In addition, most of the tasks presented in the literature only involve local cleaning job and do not require full coverage. The task setting of this paper involves full coverage cleaning of a public toilet on multiple work sites, as shown in Fig.1. Therefore, the optimization of BPs become very critical for task performance.
Usually, BPO can be solved by inverse kinematics. The mainstream idea is to establish a mapping between the joint space and the task space ofﬂine, such as reachability map [6] and capability map [7], and then obtain the optimal BP by querying the reachability inversion [8]. The difference lies in the representation structure of the map. However, the majority of works are focused on grasping or planning tasks, so only the local reachability is concerned; Secondly, the task setting only cares about the reachability and manipulability on a single placement, and does not consider global optimal solutions for sequential tasks. Besides, the trajectory of the cleaning task does not have strict pose constraints, so there may be an inﬁnite number of valid reachable conﬁgurations. In this case, solving the inverse kinematics is very timeconsuming.

In this paper, a SLD-based representation of the workspace is used for decoupling of task constraints and BPO. It discretizes the workspace into several connected nodes, and evaluates the position of the chassis by calculating the accessibility and manipulability of the robot over all nodes. The RM has nothing to do with the speciﬁc task settings, so it can be well decoupled from the task constraints. In order to get inverse reachability and optimal working pose, a hash map which stores manipulability, collision information and corresponding conﬁgurations are used. In order to consider the objectives of coverage, manipulability, and time cost simultaneously, this paper formulates the BPO problem as a MOOP, and uses the evolutionary algorithm to ﬁnd optimal solutions. The idea of this paper is similar to [9], the difference is that [9] solves the BPO problem for multi-robot collaborative coverage planning, and this paper aims at single robot’s coverage planning on multiple placements. Secondly, collision detection is introduced in computing favoured base placements (FBP). Experiments show that this process will directly affect the feasibility of the optimal BP. Besides, we formulate the time optimal objective as a TSP, which is more reasonable.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Representing the workspace with SLD, which can decouple task constraints and BPs, and a new RM is used to obtain the optimal working pose for tasks with soft constraints.
• Modelling the sequential coverage cleaning task as a MOOP. The coverage, manipulability and time cost can be easily considered in a single framework.
• The proposed method is validated on a coverage cleaning task. The experiments show that the proposed method can greatly increase the coverage and robustness of the mobile manipulation task.
II. RELATED WORK
The approaches for solving optimal BPs can be divided into three categories, namely, RM based, neural networks (NN) based, and optimization based. The ofﬂine RM generally uses a certain kind of data structure and is constructed through inverse kinematics. Finally, the optimal BPs are obtained through retrieval or heuristic search. [10] presents a classic way to construct a RM. First, the task space is discretized into voxels, and a sphere is established for each voxel, then some poses are sampled on the surface of the sphere. The inverse kinematics is performed on each sphere pose to evaluate reachability. If it is reachable, store the data to the RM. The inverse reachability map (IRM) is used when solving for the BP. [8] considers quality information such as manipulability and self-distance on the basis of RM, and can return the distribution of the base position. Paper [7] uses directional structures to represent reachability information. To speed up ofﬂine map construction, [6] proposes a hybrid approach. In order to consider both the navigation cost and the manipulation cost, [11] uses an online cost map and a heuristic search method for base placement determination.

The second type of approaches is learning-based. [12] uses reinforcement learning to learn a base movement policy that keeps the target reachable based on the target position and the current robot’s velocity. By using the reachability signal as a reward function, the policy is updated by proximal policy optimization (PPO). This method can be run online, but optimality is not guaranteed. For the grasping task in dynamic environments, [13] uses a signed distance ﬁeld to indicate the reachability and trains a neural network to characterize the grasping quality, so that BPs with poor grasping quality can be ﬁltered out very quickly.
The third type of methods is optimization-based, which formulates BPO as a MOOP [14], and solve the BP by combining RM and evolutionary algorithms.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Problem description
Suppose a robot performs a series of chores at home, such as cleaning the dining table, sink, and kitchen. The robot traverses each target in turn, stops within the appropriate range of the target, stretches out the robotic arm, and performs the covering cleaning task until all tasks are fulﬁlled according to the speciﬁed standards. Let zi = (x, y, θ) represent the coordinate of a BP, and T = {T1, T2, · · · , Tn} represent the given task set. For a speciﬁc robot, the feasible working space on each state zi is expressed as Ω = W (zi), the BPO problem refers to ﬁnding a set of optimal zi to satisfy T ⊆ i=1 m W (zi). Meanwhile, the following task metrics need to be considered:
• Accessibility/Coverage. The robot needs to cover as much of the work area as possible;
• Minimal time consuming. Minimize the number of BPs and visit the optimal BPs in a proper sequence;
• Manipulability. The robot should try to avoid singular positions;
• Safety. Minimize the risk of robot collisions.
B. Reachability representation
Usually the reachability for a given BP and task constraints are coupled together. The task constraint is generally represented by a ﬁxed trajectory, or a pose. Reachability evaluation can be seen as solving an inverse kinematics problem if the trajectory or pose constraints are known in advance. But for some tasks, the task constraint can be a distribution over trajectories, such as the cleaning task. In this case, evaluating reachability by inverse kinematics is particularly time-consuming since a large number of candidate BPs need to be checked. The problem is more complicated if the collision constraints are also considered. Therefore, this paper evaluates the reachability based on the discrete representation of the workspace instead of the speciﬁc task at hand. Thus, no matter what the distribution of the task is, we only focus on the reachability of each discrete area in workspace. One way to discretize an arbitrary workspace is using SLD [15]. The SLD method approximates the surface of the workspace by constructing local circular surface in three-dimensional space. The obtained SLD is represented

by three parameters, namely radius r, center coordinate p and normal vector n, as shown in Fig.2. By computing the robot’s manipulability, accessibility and other indicators over each SLD, the goodness of each BP can be veriﬁed.
Fig. 2. SLD representation of 3D surface.
C. Mathematical Modeling A very important metric for cleaning tasks is coverage. In
addition, it is often hoped that the robot has good dexterity in the workspace to avoid singular positions, and the robot can perform tasks with the highest efﬁciency and minimum time. Therefore, BPO is an optimization problem that considers multiple objectives, and the objectives are contradictory to each other. For example, in order to achieve higher coverage, the most direct way is to increase the number of BP, but the increase in the number of BP will also increase the time to fulﬁll the task. Therefore, this paper models the BPO problem as a MOOP, and the optimal BPs are selected from Pareto optimal front of the MOOP. The following sections will introduce the objectives considered in this paper.
Objective 1: Maximal Coverage. Coverage indicates the range of the workspace that the robot end-effector can access. For the table cleaning task, the workspace is the entire surface of the table, and the coverage rate is the proportion of the area that can be cleaned to the total area. Based on the SLD representation introduced in Sec.III-B, the coverage can be deﬁned as:
f1(Z) = k=1 m N (zk) (1) C
where Z = {z1, z2, · · · , zm} stands for the base placements, N (zk) indicates the number of SLDs that the robot can reach to at the k-th BP, and C represents the total number of SLDs used to represent the cleaning workspace.
Given the BP zk, computing the reachability to a SLD by inverse kinematics is a non-trivial task. This is mainly because the inverse calculation itself becomes very tricky if collision is considered or the conﬁguration of the manipulator does not meet the Pieper criterion. What’s more, for task with uncertainties, a large number of inverse operations need to be done, which is very time-consuming. To address this issue, we construct a RM M ofﬂine. Based on this map, the reachability of an arbitrary SLD can be retrieved very

quickly, and further, the optimal reachable pose and joint conﬁguration for the SLD can be returned simultaneously.
The process to construct a RM M is summarized as follows: 1) We discretize the robot workspace into uniformly positioned cubes, expressed as G = Decompose(l, δ), where l represents the maximal stretch length of the robot and δ is the resolution of discretization; 2) Discretize the joint space, then get all possible permutations Q of each joint denoted, where each element in Q represents a conﬁguration of the robot; 3) For each conﬁguration qj ∈ Q, calculate the end effector pose Tj, manipulability Wj, and occupied cubes Goj ← GridOccupied(qj), where Tj = FK(qj) is calculated by the forward kinematics; 4) Get the position pj = (x, y, z) and approaching vector nj of the end effector from Tj, then the voxel index of position p in G is calculated by (a, b, c) = ( x/δ , y/δ , z/δ ). Finally, insert key value pair [key = (a, b, c), value = {pj, qj, nj, Wj, Goj }] into M; 5) Repeat step 3 and 4 for each qj ∈ Q.
To evaluate reachability and retrieve the optimal conﬁguration for SLDj, the steps are as follows: 1) First, transform the reference frame of SLDj and environmental obstacles to the robot base frame, so that task reference frame are consistent with M; 2) Compute voxel index (a, b, c) from the center coordinate of SLD ; 3) Query if there exists key = (a, b, c) in M, if not, it means the SLD is unreachable, and stop searching. Otherwise, retrieve the value corresponds to the key and go to step 4. The value is represented as S = {pk, qk, nk, Wk, Gok|k = 0, · · · , K}, K is the number of valid conﬁgurations for SLDj; 4) Cluster S by K-means into groups gi according to the angular distance to the normal vector n of SLDj; 5) Return the group gi with the smallest angle distance to the approaching vector nj of the SLDj; 6) Ranking gi in descending order with respect to manipulability Wk, and the optimal conﬁguration is the one with maximal manipulability and collision-free. Collision checking can be veriﬁed very efﬁciently by using Gok.
Given the RM M, for each BP zk the reachability number of N (zk) is counted by following steps introduced in the last paragraph. If a SLD is reachable at different BPs, only count it once.
Objective 2: Minimal Time. In addition to considering the coverage, it is also hoped that the used time is optimal. The work time is divided into two parts, namely the time for cleaning surface of targets and navigating between different BPs. The time for cleaning is equal to the sweep path distance is divided by the average Cartesian velocity of the robot end-effector. To ensure full coverage, the sweep path should traverse each SLD’s center. Meanwhile, to minimize sweep length, it is beneﬁcial to visit each SLD only once. Thus, this problem can be formulated as a TSP, expressed as:
m
TSP (V (zk)) vee
k=1
where V (zk) represents the cluster of reachable SLDs at zk, TSP(V (zk)) represents the path distance solved by TSP solver, and vee represents the average Cartesian space

velocity of the arm end effector. In this paper, we implement a dynamic programming method to solve the TSP. Assuming that navigation time between two BPs is t, then the overall time cost is
m
f2(Z) = TSP(V (zk)) vee + (m − 1)t (2)
k=1

Objective 3: Maximal Manipulability. Another indicator to

consider is manipulability, which represents the dexterity of

the robot in each direction of the workspace. It is denoted

as
m N (zk)

f3(Z) =

W (qkj) ,

(3)

k=1 j=1

where W (qkj) stands for the manipulability when the robot is in conﬁguration qk and reaches to SLDj, expressed as

W (qkj) = det J (qkj) · J (qkj)
D. Multi-objective optimization
Combining objectives 1, 2 and 3, the BPO problem is modeled as a multi-objective optimization problem, expressed as:
min f (Z) = [−f1(Z), f2(Z), −f3(Z)], (4)
s.t. Z ⊆ FBPs
To solve Eq.4, there are weighted method, -constrained method, genetic algorithm, etc. In this paper, the nondominated sort genetic algorithm [16] (NSGAII) is used.
The chromosome in NSGAII represents the design variable Z of the MOOP in Eq.4, and each gene on the chromosome represents a BP zk. In initialization, all candidate BPs are generated with uniform sampling in preferred workspace. Each position is mapped to a integer for notation convenience and the number 0 means no placements. For example, Z = {3, 0, 12} means that 2 placements are required to cover the current task, corresponding to positions 3 and 12 respectively. Therefore, theoretically the algorithm will automatically remove redundant placements and get an optimal number of m. The running process of the NSGAII is as follows: 1) N parents are randomly generated at the beginning of the algorithm; 2) Select a pair of superior children from parents by evaluating the ﬁtness function and the crowding degree, then perform crossover and mutation operations on children to obtain a new offspring individual; 3) Repeat step 2 until N offspring individuals are obtained; 4) Merge the parent and offspring, recalculate the ﬁtness function and crowding degree, then select N individuals from merged group as the initial population of the next generation. The process are repeated until the maximum number of generations is reached. Note that the crossover and mutation operations may lead to duplicate genes in Z, which means the robot will reach to a same position during the task. Obviously, it is unreasonable, so this situation should be avoided. Besides, adjacent placements are too close may not beneﬁcial for exploration. This constraint can be guaranteed by limiting the sampling range when generating new individuals. It is

NSGAII
RM Candidate BPs
Robot SLD

TABLE I EXPERIMENT PARAMETERS

Mutation probability Number of genes Number of mutation genes Tournament participants Population size Iteration generations Voxel size Pose size Discretization size/DoF Range Resolution (x, y, θ) Number of BPs Number of FBPs Arm Cartesian velocity Base velocity Radius No. of SLDs

0.6 2/3/4 1 20 40 80 0.03m 172063 20 3.3m × 1.5m (0.05m, 0.05m, 90°) 3213 1840 0.1m/s 0.2m/s 0.04m 200

worth noting that the solution obtained by NSGAII can be guaranteed to be optimal under the SLD representation. When speciﬁc task constraints are given, a ﬁne-turning can be performed near the optimal solution to further improve the task performance.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Simulation results
In order to verify the correctness of the proposed approach, both simulation and physical experiments are conducted. A real toilet environment is reconstructed in the experiment. Based on the reconstructed model, the spatial position information and surface geometry information of the washbasin and urinal can be obtained. This experiment mainly focus on the washbasin cleaning task since this task needs full coverage from different placements. First, according to the spatial position of the washbasin, candidate BPs are generated around it. In the experiment, a rectangular area in front of the washbasin is used to generate candidate BPs. The X and Y axis of the rectangular surface are discretized with a step size of 0.05m, and the yaw angle is designed to be evenly spaced by 90 degrees, thus a total of 3213 candidate BPs are obtained. In order to speed up the optimization, the non-favoured candidate BPs are ﬁltered out in advance to obtain FBPs, which should not too close or too far away from the washbasin. BPs that are too far can be ﬁltered out by calculating the maximum reachable distance range of the robot arm. BPs that are too close are more likely to cause collisions. In this paper, both the robot and the washbasin are represented by polygons, and then collision detection for polygons in 2D plane is conducted to remove collision BPs. The size of resulting FBPs is 1840. The valid cleanning surface of the washbasin is approximated by 200 SLDs with radius set to 0.04m. The voxel resolution of the ofﬂine RM is set to 0.03m. To generate reachable pose in RM, each joint is uniformly discretized into 20 values within the limit range, After removing the self-collision conﬁgurations, a total of 172063 valid poses are obtained.
We use NSGAII to optimize BPs. The parameter settings of the NSGAII and all other parameters are summarized in

Tab.I. After running 80 generations, the obtained results are shown in Fig.3. Fig.3(a) shows the mean and variance of each objective function when the initial number of BP is set to 3. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, after 10 generations, nearly 90% coverage is achieved. As the iteration progresses, the coverage and manipulability gradually increase, and the task execution time gradually decreases. This shows that the whole evolutionary trend is right. The ﬁnal average coverage reached more than 95%, and the highest coverage reached 98.5%. Fig.3(b), (c) and d compare the coverage, manipulability and consuming time when the initial BP number is 2, 3 and 4, respectively .Fig.3(b) and (c) show that greater coverage and manipulability values are achieved if the number of BP is bigger. This is also in line with common sense. When more BPs are used, the robot has better reachability, and thus the operation will be better. But at the same time, it also increases the task execution time, as shown in (d).

when BP is equal to 2 in real task execution. Speciﬁcally, the solution which coverage is equal to 97.5% is selected. The corresponding coordinates of BPs are shown in the Fig.4. It can be seen from the ﬁgure that the two BPs are located in the center of the ﬁrst and third basins, respectively, covering the area on the left and right half of the washbasin. The result is also as expected.

Fig. 4. Optimized BPs. Axes on ground represent computed FBPs. Green circles are SLDs used for representing the washbasin. Total two BPs are optimized for washbasin task.

Fig. 3. BPO results for toilet washbasin cleaning task.
Comparing the cases of the number of BP is equal to 3 and 4 in detail, it is found that the coverage for two cases is very close, and the manipulability is slightly better than the case of BP is 3, but the execution time is longer. This shows that when the number of BP is greater than 3, it is difﬁcult to improve the task performance further by using more BPs. In addition, it is worth noting that although the mean coverage and manipulability of BP is equal to 2 is not as good as that of BP is equal to 3, some solutions in Pareto front still achieve 95% coverage and take less time. For realworld tasks, setting up more BPs in addition to increasing the navigation time, the switching of robot states between each pair of BPs will additionally increase the complexity of the task process. Therefore, we choose the solution with the largest coverage from the Pareto optimal front obtained

B. Real-world experiments
Based on the simulation results, we conduct experiments in real-world situations. The hardware platform consists of a differential steered mobile robot and a 6-DOF collaborative robotic arm. There is a lift between the robotic arm and the mobile robot, as shown in Fig.6. We use Nvidia Xavier as our computing platform. The arm controller, local localization and online motion planning algorithm run simultaneously on the computing platform. After the robot navigates to a BP, it ﬁrst updates its estimate of the current pose through RGBD observations, then the cleaning path are updated based on the relocation information. An example of a coverage path is shown in Fig.5. There are a total of 12 paths, and each side has 6 paths. Finally, the planning algorithm is called to execute the obstacle avoidance task, and the joint space trajectory is obtained. The experimental process is shown in the Fig.6, where each picture represents a snapshot of the working situation on one of the BPs shown in Fig.4.
Experiments show all the cleaning paths are successfully planned. However, paths that are far away from the robot

Fig. 5. Example of cleaning coverage paths. Black dot lines stands for cleaning path. We don’t consider path inside the basin in our experiments.
may be partially unreachable. We deﬁne the coverage of path as the length of the path performed by the actual robot divided by the length of the total coverage path. In the experiment, the left side achieves 87% coverage, and the right side is 93%. If ﬁne-tuning is performed further, which means execute a local base placement search (BPS) nearby the results given by BPO, 100% coverage can be achieved on both sides.
Fig. 6. Snapshot of real-world washbasin cleaning task.
V. CONCLUSIONS To solve the BPO problem under task uncertainties, this paper uses SLD to model the workspace, which can decouple task constraints and the BPO problem. To obtain optimal coverage, manipulability and task execution time at the same time, this paper formulates the BPO problem as a MOOP. Coverage can be easily calculated using the SLD model. For task execution time, under the full coverage and least time constraints, this paper models it as a TSP problem and the whole problem is solved by an evolutionary algorithm. Finally, based on a real toilet scene, simulation calculations and actual experiments are carried out in this paper. The experiments show that the simulation results can almost be directly transferred to the real scene without further modiﬁcations. Furthermore, to ensure the feasibility of the BPs, collision detection is introduced when calculating the FBPs. In order to further improve the optimality of BPO, a local BPS can be performed. Experiments show that the method proposed in this paper provides a quantiﬁable and efﬁcient approach for base placements evaluation and optimization. It avoids on-site debugging through trial and error, which is of great signiﬁcance for mobile manipulation applications. After the base placement is determined, the cleaning path is artiﬁcially partitioned and assigned to each BP in our experiment. A better practice is to automatically partition

the workspace according to the position of BPs, and then
generate the cleaning paths corresponding to each parti-
tion. Subsequent research will further explore BPO methods
combined with automatic partitioning. For the reachability
evaluation, this paper uses an ofﬂine reachability map, and
a learning-based online reachability veriﬁcation method can
also be integrated in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning for robotics,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 1258–1276, Dec. 2013.
[2] A. M. Kabir, K. N. Kaipa, J. Marvel, and S. K. Gupta, “Automated Planning for Robotic Cleaning Using Multiple Setups and Oscillatory Tool Motions,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 1364–1377, Jul. 2017.
[3] J. Yin, K. G. S. Apuroop, Y. K. Tamilselvam, R. E. Mohan, B. Ramalingam, and A. V. Le, “Table Cleaning Task by Human Support Robot Using Deep Learning Technique,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 6, p. 1698, Mar. 2020.
[4] D. Mart´ınez, G. Alenya`, and C. Torras, “Planning robot manipulation to clean planar surfaces,” Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 39, pp. 23–32, Mar. 2015.
[5] G. Paul, S. Webb, D. Liu, and G. Dissanayake, “A Robotic System for Steel Bridge Maintenance: Field Testing,” p. 8.
[6] O. Porges, T. Stouraitis, C. Borst, and M. A. Roa, “Reachability and Capability Analysis for Manipulation Tasks,” in ROBOT2013: First Iberian Robotics Conference, ser. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, M. A. Armada, A. Sanfeliu, and M. Ferre, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 703–718.
[7] F. Zacharias, C. Borst, and G. Hirzinger, “Capturing robot workspace structure: Representing robot capabilities,” in In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS, pp. 3229–3236.
[8] N. Vahrenkamp, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann, “Robot placement based on reachability inversion,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. Karlsruhe, Germany: IEEE, May 2013, pp. 1970–1975.
[9] M. Hassan, “Enabling methodologies for optimal coverage by multiple autonomous industrial robots,” Thesis, 2018.
[10] A. Makhal and A. K. Goins, “Reuleaux: Robot Base Placement by Reachability Analysis,” Oct. 2017.
[11] F. Reister, M. Grotz, and T. Asfour, “Combining Navigation and Manipulation Costs for Time-Efﬁcient Robot Placement in Mobile Manipulation Tasks,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 9913–9920, Oct. 2022.
[12] D. Honerkamp, T. Welschehold, and A. Valada, “Learning kinematic feasibility for mobile manipulation through deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6289– 6296, 2021.
[13] I. Akinola, J. Xu, S. Song, and P. K. Allen, “Dynamic Grasping with Reachability and Motion Awareness,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Sep. 2021, pp. 9422–9429.
[14] M. Hassan, D. Liu, and G. Paul, “Collaboration of Multiple Autonomous Industrial Robots through Optimal Base Placements,” Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, vol. 90, May 2018.
[15] G. Paul, N. Kwok, and D. Liu, “A novel surface segmentation approach for robotic manipulator-based maintenance operation planning,” Automation in Construction, vol. 29, pp. 136–147, Jan. 2013.
[16] K. Deb, S. Agrawal, A. Pratap, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 2002.

